Structuring the Chaos: Enabling Small Business Cyber-Security Risks & Assets Modelling with a UML Class Model Tracy Tam RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria Asha Rao RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria Joanne Hall RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria Abstract Small businesses around the world are increasingly adopting IT, and consequently becoming more vulnerable to cyber-incidents. Whilst small businesses are aware of the cyber-security risks around their business, many struggle with implementing mitigations. Some of these can be traced to fundamental differences in the characteristics of small business versus large enterprises where modern cyber-security solutions are widely deployed. Small business specific cyber-security tools are needed. Currently available cyber-security tools and standards assume technical expertise and time resources often not practical for small businesses. Cyber-security competes with other roles that small business owners take on, e.g. clean- ing, sales etc. A small business model, salient and implementable at-scale, with simplified non-specialist terminologies and presentation is needed to encourage sustained participation of all stakeholders, not just technical ones. We propose a new UML class (Small IT Data (SITD)) model to sup- port the often chaotic information-gathering phase of a small business’ first foray into cyber-security. The SITD model is designed in the UML format to help small business implement technical solutions. The SITD model structure stays relevant by using generic classes and structures that evolve with technology and environmental changes. The SITD model keeps security decisions proportionate to the business by highlighting re- lationships between business strategy tasks and IT infrastructure. We construct a set of design principles to address small business cyber- security needs. Model components are designed in response to these needs. The uses of the SITD model are then demonstrated and design principles validated by examining a case study of a real small business operational 1 arXiv:2403.14872v1 [cs.CR] 21 Mar 2024 and IT information. The SITD model’s ability to illustrate breach infor- mation is also demonstrated using the NotPetya incident. 1 Introduction Small business (0-19 employees [4]) plays a crucial role in the global economy, measured by the number of small enterprises [20], employment statistics [10, 33] and other contributions [36, 47]. The pandemic propelled small businesses globally into a new world driven by technology. Small business cyber-security has, thus, become a problem that can no longer be ignored. As the number of novice small businesses adopting technology increases [17], so does the cyber attack surface [48]. Getting small businesses to a cyber-security ready state has proved challenging, with many small business owners aware of the need for cyber-security but unsure of what to do [8, 43]. Small business differs from larger enterprises in many ways, ranging from communication style, financial resources, internal expertise available, to a lack of immediate incentives [49]. Unlike larger enterprises, the majority of small businesses have less time and resources to study and manage IT and cyber- security. Small businesses with less than 5 employees make up nearly 90% of all businesses in Australia [11]. In these micro businesses, a business owner often takes on ancillary jobs such as cleaner, security guard and IT support, in addition to core business responsibilities. Cyber-security is only one of many competing priorities (e.g. generating sales, making products etc.) needed to keep the business alive. Cyber-security analysis of a small business is often left up to individual implementers, using tools meant for large businesses, producing sub-optimal results for this resource-constrained cohort. [49]. There is need for an effective model to organise and analyse critical small business cyber-security information. Cyber-security tools and processes lack focus on small business priorities and are not proportionate to the size of a small business. Fundamental to any new tools or processes is a consistent and enduring way of organising cyber- security information for subsequent analysis. Here, inspiration could come from IT where sorting and storing of information is often done via data models [26]. A data model foundation allows rapid deployment in various solution technology stacks for any potential small business security solutions. This paper proposes a UML data model, the Small IT Data (SITD) model, and process to support the often overwhelming information-gathering phase of a small business cyber-security journey. We first describe the rationale behind the new approach and model in section 2. Section 4 describes the design principles. In section 5 we justify the choice of UML as a modelling tool. The new class model and its components are introduced in section 6, before validation via ap- plication to real-life small businesses (case study) in section 7. The insights and analysis gained from the resulting models are discussed throughout. Section 8 discusses how the model’s aligns with the aims and design principles. 2 2 Problems with Existing Tools Many existing cyber-security analyses and tools are designed with the flexibility to allow for use in any organisation. This flexibility requires inherent technical expertise to understand and apply appropriately. This expertise is not available within the small business space [49]. The following issues arise when a small business tries to use current tools: • Attack Based Lists (e.g. OWASP [55], Mitre Att&ck [51]) – A busi- ness needs to navigate through a repository of attack techniques with no relation to business priorities. IT training is needed to understand the terminology used, as well as the implications and issues discussed. • Controls Based Lists (e.g. CIS Controls [15], Essential 8 [9]) – Use of generic terms e.g. systems, applications, requires a small business to further investigate what the controls apply to. This risks things, e.g. IoT devices, being left out altogether because they don’t fall into an easily recognisable category . • Risk Management Based Standards (e.g. ISO 27001 [45], NIST Cy- bersecurity Framework [31]) – Include broad statements that require in- terpretation of how controls and processes apply to a business. The results of this process often have technical consequences which are not obvious without technical training. The vast majority of small businesses have no technical expertise [7]. With limited turnover and budget, the average small business cannot afford a cy- ber security professional [49]. As a non-revenue-generating task, cyber-security needs to be understandable and usable by these non-technical small business de- cision makers. A more approachable tool, from both technical and investment perspectives, is needed to make cyber-security accessible for small businesses, making participation more attractive. 2.1 New Approach Needed The lack of tailoring to small businesses undermines the effectiveness of any analytic tools or assistance. New approaches are needed to take into account the human aspects of small businesses [39, 13, 49]. Humans (employees and owner) are a critical part of cyber-security plans and posture [54]. In addition, a good security strategy requires involvement from stakeholders at all levels in a business [50]. Maintaining cyber-security ownership over the long term in a small business can be challenging when many cyber-security resources require a level of techni- cal understanding. The majority of adults in developed countries do not have a high level of technical skills [34]. Expecting non-technical small business owners to gain the requisite cyber-security technical knowledge unassisted undermines a business’ cyber-security self-efficacy. Lack of self-belief in the effectiveness of 3 one’s action can undermine the motivation to engage [25]. According to the EAST principle [42] of human behavioural insights, making something easy also helps encourage the desired behaviour. Improving the overall ease of access for non-technical stakeholders can improve the outcome of a cyber-security solution by facilitating effective and ongoing participation. To enable small business engagement with any new cyber-security tool, it is essential to redesign the current highly technical mental structure of cyber- security analysis. A cyber-security system with infinite flexibility has proven to be an issue for small business adoption (as mentioned above), so any new approach has to address this gap by tailoring to small business operational and human characteristics. To achieve this, a re-defining of the fundamental building blocks of how cyber-security is presented to small business is needed. Technology and cyber-risk-centric language, common in existing security frameworks, need to give way to concepts familiar to non-technical business owners. The proposed data model needs to center on business concepts and terms that an average person with no technical training can understand. Building on the above, to support a business-friendly cyber-security process, we propose a new class model (referred to as SITD model) to help a small busi- ness organise and record its priorities and its IT. For a small business operator, a model needs to document IT details as these are often not at the forefront of their mind [41], with many relying on informal communication [46]. The initial cyber-security step of recording the IT being used can require significant effort from small businesses. The SITD model eases the cognitive load by beginning with information in areas of familiarity, e.g. day-to-day tasks, before tying it back to cyber-security. 3 Target Users and Businesses of SITD Model At a technical level, the SITD model serves as the data foundation for future small business cyber-security analysis tools and processes. There are 2 primary target stakeholders for the SITD model: the small businesses to be protected, and the cyber-professionals implementing cyber-security tools to be used by the small business. 3.1 Target Modelled Businesses The SITD model is designed to model small businesses with 0 -19 employees [4], in order to protect them. (Sole traders/single person companies are considered to have 0 employees.) One exclusion to this broad scope is small businesses that offer IT-centric services and products, as they are likely to have additional security considerations (e.g. DevSecOps [27]) and technical skills. 4 3.2 Target Data Structure Users The SITD model is created for modelling non-technical small businesses. The large number of small businesses means that any small business cyber-security tools need to be deployable at-scale. Technology will likely play a vital role in the tool’s dissemination. Consequently, the SITD model needs to provide a structure that is easily implementable using technology. Due to this, the more immediate users of the SITD data model are likely to be prospective cyber- security tool developers or professionals looking for a common way to structure information in a quest to protect small businesses. The SITD model gives developers and professionals the data foundation for future security tools with a small business-centric approach. The model will help solution implementers to move away from the traditional cyber-security and technology centric approaches. 4 Model Design Principles In addition to the small business and developer characteristics discussed in Sec- tion 3, the SITD model is designed with the following guiding principles to facilitate small business applications. 4.1 Focus on Business Priorities SITD model needs to start from the perspective of business goals, the job tasks supporting these goals, and the IT tools needed to support these job tasks. The goal of cyber-security is to facilitate secure business use of IT. To be used, IT needs to deliver value to the business. In small businesses, IT tools are often chosen because the IT solution is more convenient or efficient than its manual counterpart (e.g. digital spreadsheet for sales recording). The re-focus towards business priorities also serves as a reminder that the business value of the IT tool needs to be preserved, even after securing it. However, business value cannot be judged from a technology-centric view alone. Another important consideration is ensuring incident response and recovery are business goals. 4.2 Capture Intangible Factors and Relationships The SITD model needs to illustrate relationships between physical and intan- gible components. Past cyber-security incidents and attack techniques have involved many fac- tors ranging from technology and operations to people [21, 23]. Social engi- neering attacks illustrate the need for technology to work with the less tangible aspects of an organisation such as human behaviour. The SITD model needs to capture the impacts of the non-tangible factors on the overall posture of a busi- ness, e.g. being in a highly competitive field (industrial espionage), or having disgruntled employees. 5 The documentation of physical and intangible factors provides opportunities for using the defence in depth security strategy [32]. This strategy allows smaller tools/solutions to be combined to form better overall security postures. The ability to combine smaller controls is advantageous to small business due to their resource constraints [49], which makes them unlikely to be able to afford large ready-made cyber-security solutions. 4.3 Allow for Incomplete Information The threat landscape is ever-evolving [1, 18] and cyber-security is never ‘fi- nalised’. Hence, the SITD model needs to support cyber-security as a contin- uous improvement process along with the need for it to function even in an incomplete state. In addition, businesses, particularly those in a startup phase (especially small businesses) often change on a day to day basis. As such, tools expecting linear progression or completion (e.g. waterfall methodologies) are not practicable from either a logistics or ongoing relevance perspective. There- fore, the SITD model needs to view incomplete information as an opportunity for further discussion and exploration, rather than a roadblock. 4.4 Agnostic For maintainability into the future the SITD model should be agnostic with regards to several factors: 1. Language – Cyber-security crosses international borders: many cyber- crimes have transnational elements [53]. Minimising textual information provides room for visual representations. A combination of textual and visual information has been shown to increase understanding [2] and re- call [14]. Where possible the SITD model needs to prioritise visual cues over words. 2. Technology – Where applicable the SITD model needs to be technology agnostic to ensure continued relevance as technology or attack techniques evolve. The SITD model needs to serve as a record of the ongoing rele- vance of IT to the small business, and not as a static picture. 3. Standards, Legislation and Industry – A mobile phone used in a food service business essentially has the same technical vulnerabilities as the same one in a legal practice. However, the context of supported business goals sets these 2 phones apart as do the ramifications if the phenes are breached or lost. Rather than specifically including locale-specific condi- tions such as HIPAA, GDPR, Reportable Breach scheme etc, the SITD model needs to capture local context in the business part of the model, e.g. job function, tasks, strategies. 6 4.5 Enable Cyber-Security Analysis Ultimately the SITD model should aim to capture sufficient information about the small business to enable further risk analysis and discussions. Most cyber- security standards [30] emphasise the need for IT inventory recording. The SITD record, especially when linked to its users, needs to serves as input to allow planning of further security steps for the business. In addition, the SITD model needs to capture sufficient detail to conduct cyber-security risk analysis, including assessing Common Vulnerability and Ex- posures (CVE) impacts, risk mitigation planning and incident analysis. 5 Choice of Modelling Tool Our choice of the SITD model tool is driven by the needs of potential imple- menters of small business cyber-security solutions - IT developers and cyber- security professionals, for reasons discussed in Section 3.2. Hence we focus on data model formats common within the IT industry. The following candidate approaches were identified and evaluated: • Spreadsheets/Data Tables with Custom Relationships. • Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) [16]. • Unified Modelling Language (UML) [24]. The table/databases approach is unsuitable due to lack of a standardised way for entities and relationships to be modelled in cyber-security. The table approach requires creation of a new ecosystem: with new rules needing to be created, tested and maintained. A new standard only serves to add complexity within a field already overflowing with information. 5.1 Advantages of UML While small business IT can technically be modelled within both ERD and UML, UML is more suitable for the following reasons: • Holistic nature of the UML ecosystem – UML encompasses technical and non-technical aspects. This aligns with the aim of describing struc- tural, intangible and dynamic aspects of small business cyber-security. For future work, UML can inherently model behaviour, business processes, timing, actions etc. • UML allows for different perspectives – UML natively recognises that the same piece of data can be viewed from different perspectives (or ‘views’). For example, customer information is a piece of data inside a business database, but UML can recognise that it is used by staff when a customer enquires about their account. Given that the SITD model is concerned with cyber-security in both the data itself as well as transitory events on the data, UML’s view better aligns with our aims. 7 • UML can be converted into ERD – A UML class diagram can be converted to ERD, making, reversion to ERD possible in the future. • Slimline presentation of information – UML allows for attributes and operations to be applied to individual entities. A similar entity within ERD requires multiple objects making the entity more complex in visual appearance. • Use of UML within the industry – UML has been adopted widely into the IT and business worlds, where it can be used to describe whole ecosystems of software, hardware, processes and actors involved. This focus is important given the potential developers of future small business security solutions. In conclusion, UML design philosophy is better aligned with the SITD model goals and the possible future extensibility of small business cyber-security. 6 The SITD Model In this section, we present details of each sub-part of the SITD model, before linking the parts together into an overall structure. Real life business oper- ations and IT architectures are then used to illustrate the model’s use. The SITD model centers on the business and branches out to the connected IT infrastructure. The SITD model relies heavily on the class and object diagrams within UML. These diagrams operate on the concept of class and associations between these classes. All other details are defined within this construct. For a quick start guide on reading UML models and conventions, please see Appendix 9. 6.1 The SITD Model Classes The classes in the SITD model reflect important small business and cyber- security entities, and as such are not restricted to physical entities. Table 1 identifies critical concepts which are treated as classes in the SITD model. Note: Some concepts, described in multiple classes within IT architecture design and modelling conventions, have been simplified into a single construct. The reasons and implications are discussed in each part below. Associations (used to describe class relationships between 2 classes) contain additional infor- mation, including relationship multiplicity as well as direction. These are noted in standard UML notations. In the next four subsections, we will look at sub-components of the SITD model. Section 6.6 connects the sub-models back into the overall model struc- ture. 8 Class Areas Examples Business entity Doe’s Gardening Service Human/group actors Owner; Employees Job tasks & roles Payroll Processing; Manufacturing Physical location Office; Client Site Selected hardware & software de- tails Mobile Phone; CAD Remote/cloud IT systems Client IT Systems; Cloud Data Storage Data/information Customer Data; Audit Records Motivations and strategies Stay in Business; Lifestyle; Product Qual- ity Table 1: Class areas (discussed in section 6.1) covered as part of the SITD model’s aim of capturing cyber and business salient information. 6.2 SITD Submodel: Business To ensure security decisions are relevant and proportional, the business is central to the SITD model. The Business Strategy of the SITD model (Figure 1) captures the fundamental relationships between the business, its aims and the people working in it. The base class is centred on the business entity being protected, i.e. the business itself. Basic details of the business are captured within the attributes. The business’ maturity stage and strategy [28], which affects its behaviour pro- file [41], are recorded for influence on business activities. The derived char- acteristics are placed into 3 broad categories, Entrepreneurial, Administrative and Engineering, which are then linked to individual day-to-day tasks. En- trepreneurial characteristics capture any growth ambitions e.g. partnerships, branding, while Engineering characteristics describe operational matters e.g. factory building. Administrative characteristics keep the business running, e.g. business registration, tax management, legal compliance. (For businesses with narrow business goals, the characteristics and job tasks can be combined into a single layer to streamline the SITD model.) This view of the SITD model highlights that without the business reasons stemming from the business strategy (e.g. keeping the business alive), the tasks would not be done. The number of physical persons (and management hierarchy) working within a business is also recorded, since business is a human endeavour. In a small business, the distinction of physical people is important given the manual (and often adhoc) processes that exist [28]. The multiple hats worn by small business employees leads to informal and less defined communication and processes than those in larger corporations. Since human communication forms the basis of many social engineering attacks [29], the number of employees is an important part of cyber-security strategies. 9 Figure 1: UML class structure diagram showing the connections between dif- ferent parts of the business. (Described in section 6.2.) 6.3 SITD Submodel: Job Function The Job Function part of the SITD model describes the links between job tasks and the roles performing the tasks (Figure 2). The job tasks described as part of business goals are linked to the human responsible for the task. The task is performed in the context of the person’s job role. The SITD model allows for more than one person to work on the same task using a collaboration link in the context of different roles (e.g. business plans being completed in collaboration between the owner and accountant). Conversely, multiple physical people can work on the same job task via the same function roles (e.g. multiple sales assistants in a retail shop). This model allows for the same physical person to take on multiple job functions, as is common in micro-enterprises where the owner can also be the security, janitor and website administrator. In early analysis, the function role can be synonymous with a physical person; role information can be added after further analysis. This is particularly useful in sole trader/micro-companies where roles are not formally assigned or defined. The job function model links job tasks to the data item(s) needed to per- 10 Figure 2: The UML class structure diagram showing how job functions lead to people working together and hence needing access to specific data within the business. (Details in section 6.3.) form the tasks. Every business task requires some sort of data item to be used, whether it is the product price in a sales transaction, a recipe within a manu- facturing plant, or lesson plans within an education setting. Data is considered at a more fundamental level than just the electronic storage of the information. 6.4 SITD Submodel: IT Interaction We now link data to the IT systems used to store and use this data (Figure 3). The SITD model only includes any data stored electronically. It is assumed that any physical data stored is handled according to the existing risk management plan and outside the scope of cyber-security. Inspite of the SITD model’s elec- tronic focus, ISO27001 [45] includes physical access as part of risk management. Hence, any system implementing the SITD model needs to include reminders that physical security is still required. The data item must be stored within a destination (target) system. This is intended to be a generic container that records details of where the data is stored. The target system can range from a local drive on a laptop/phone to cloud services or records held by another business/entity. The details of the service and location are captured in the classes associated with the data. We recognise that data (class Alternate Access) can be retrieved by another party off the same system, e.g. business registration details can be requested by a member of the public using the registration body website. The target system classes are deliberately light on technical detail to reflect the reality that most small businesses have limited influence on the technical details of the electronic data storage. For example, hosted websites only allow limited customisation from a look and feel perspective, webmail providers dictate the login process and whether multi-factor authentication mechanisms are offered, retail hardware/software manufacturers decide whether memory is encrypted by 11 Figure 3: UML class structure diagram showing how a person accesses specific data in target systems using their devices and network connection. (Discussed in section 6.4.) default etc. On a physical front, the SITD model links the access to the data via a physi- cal location and device, and ultimately to a physical person. The link highlights that physical access to this device-connection pipeline plays an important part in the security posture. For example, if someone has physical access to a Wi-Fi router, then no matter how secure the target system, the risk of a man in the middle attack increases. At a physical device level, the classes are simplified from a technical view- point e.g. the OSI 7 layer model [19], to capture only applications, operating system (OS) and network connector classes - components the business worker interacts with. This is to ensure focus on the components under the worker’s control on a day to day basis. An application is any software program that the business uses on a physical device, ranging from productivity suites such as Microsoft Office to browsers for access to cloud services/web pages. While the simplification does make technical vulnerability analysis more difficult, most vulnerability notifications, common vulnerabilities & exploits, vendor notifica- tions today relate impacts to applications and/or operating systems [52]. In its current version, the SITD model does not consider system to system IT events e.g. batch jobs, scheduled events. The SITD model’s target audi- ence are non-technical small businesses; the utilisation of automated events is minimal [5]. 6.5 SITD Submodel: Threats Finally, to illustrate deviations in risk between different industries and busi- nesses, a threat model is included in the SITD model to describe any specific or general threat to the business. This section again focuses on human threat 12 actors rather than the technical threat. Removing human motivation eliminates many reasons for exploiting a vulnerable system. This human threat actor class can describe single actors e.g. an industry competitor, or groups e.g. Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)/nation state actors. Figure 4: UML class structure diagram showing how certain threat motiva- tions can mean specific data (and IT system by association) can require more attention. (Discussed in section 6.5.) The majority of small businesses, before having a cyber-incident, do not perceive cyber incidents as likely [8]. The threat model is important to docu- ment motivations, especially in specialised industries (e.g. defence contractors, fiercely competitive market conditions etc.). The threat model highlights any part of the business that may require a higher level of priority, to help assess adequate level of investment. 6.6 Overall SITD Model Each subpart of the SITD model described in sections 6.2 - 6.5 can be used independently. However, when linked together with common classes, the model creates a picture of the interrelations between IT and business goals (Figure 5). Based on the linked business goal, the business can prioritise the parts of IT needing attention from a cyber-security perspective. From an analytics perspective, the relationships show how unconnected parts of the business can lead to an asset needing protection from motivated actors. A class and relationship model highlights gaps without impeding progress. Partial data is of use to trigger investigation and further discussions. 13 Figure 5: UML class overview showing the relationships between various factors within a (sample) small businesses’ overall cyber-security posture, discussed in section 6.6. 7 SITD Model Applications We will now demonstrate the use of the SITD model by modelling a case study business. Business operation modelling of cyber-security relevant concerns is done using source data from a non-cyber-security small business case study [37] 1 to emulate a small business owner’s point of view. Technical modelling is sourced from a UK small scale IT architecture case study [35] , including small business participants. Finally, we utilise a NotPetya breach analysis to illustrate the SITD model use in incident analysis. 1As the business is currently operating, all identifying information of the small business, individuals, specific products and locations are redacted in the public version of this article to protect their privacy, including citations. Original information and citations were provided for review purposes. 14 7.1 Modelling Business Point of View An academic case study of an agricultural small business [37] is used to demon- strate the SITD model. The case study was originally constructed to illustrate quality control considerations and includes details of business tasks. The small business is in the agriculture industry and manufactures products from the main crop. A labour study of another comparable region in the same country [38] indicates that similar businesses of the same size as the agriculture business tend to operate on 1.5 FTEs (Full Time Equivalent) staff throughout the year. Seasonal workers are brought in for harvesting. For this analysis, the seasonal workers were not counted towards the employee count as they are contracted for a specific manual task (harvesting) and are likely to have minimal interaction with the business’s IT infrastructure. 7.1.1 Entering Data into the Model Using NVivo software, the information for the business operation from the case study was coded to the SITD model’s classes. When a piece of pertinent in- formation (e.g. job task, person or piece of data) is discussed, it is marked with NVivo code tags of the relevant class together with a unique label (Tag of “Job Task: Harvest” is tagged in the text when harvest is mentioned). Each code tag corresponds to a single object in the object diagram (even if it is refer- enced/tagged multiple times). This resulted in 31 codes/objects being generated across Business, Persons, Location, Job Task and Entrepreneurial Characteris- tics. Two codes (Destination: Email Host and Product Competition Organiser) were reclassified to Destination System after subsequent public information re- search. Product Import Data was recoded to Destination System: Email Host from Data Item because the international product importation process relies on email. Product Competition Organiser was also given a Destination System class as some of the competitions listed in the case study allow for complete online applications. The objects were initially placed in proximity to other instances of the same class, e.g. job tasks near other job tasks. The case study was then examined again for the relationship between objects. These relationships are drawn di- rectly in the object diagram. 7.1.2 Analysing the Result The processing of the agriculture small business case study produced Figure 6. Based on Figure 6, the following areas of hyper or lack of connectivity need discussion from a cyber-security perspective: 1. Critical Point of Failure - Owner 1 (marked with a diamond ◆in Figure 6) is involved in the majority of the tasks required to keep the small business running. Any device or system Owner 1 relies on is critical to the business running smoothly, e.g. mobile phone, laptop or cloud services. Further examination and discussion on additional security controls such 15 Figure 6: Agriculture small business case study result as depicted by the SITD model. The reclassified items, Product Competition Organiser and Email Host, are unshaded. Areas of possible investigation and discussion are marked with added symbols. Discussion in section 7.1.2. as anti-virus and backups, needs to happen to ensure availability of their devices and systems. Owner 1 may need additional training to prevent phishing [56]. 2. Orphaned Components - There are location (Home), person (Owner 2) and data (Tax Data) items (marked with a triangle ▲in Figure 6) noted in the business, but the information in the case study does not indicate relationships between these and other components. 3. Tasks with No Details - There are several tasks: Harvest Sale, Gen- eral Marketing and Product Design, identified (marked with a star ★in Figure 6), noted in the case study in general, but with no information given regarding the tools/devices needed to perform them. Most tasks need information, so further exploration is required on whether there are dependencies on IT. The lack of information by itself is not treated as a point of concern within the SITD model process. It is an expected by-product of the focus of small busi- ness owners, viz to keep business activities running. The purpose of this model is to help obtain the relevant details needed from a cyber-security perspective. 16 7.1.3 Task-Based Analysis The SITD model facilitates a job task-oriented approach where each job task is laid out. From the case study, there is the job task of crop management which covers looking after the crops and managing harvest time. Based on the information available in the case study, we get the object diagram in Figure 7. Figure 7: Elements involved in agricultural small business crop management based on information available in the case study [35]. Discussion in section 7.1.3. The case study information is inserted into the SITD model structure in Figure 8. Missing information is unshaded. Figure 8: Known elements from agricultural small business crop management discovery depicted in the SITD model are shaded in blue. Areas for discussion are unshaded. Discussion in section 7.1.3. The unshaded elements indicate missing information that needs further ex- ploration in the cyber-security analysis. In the case study, crop management decisions are dependent on data like crop ripeness. Storage, management and access of data is not specified in the case study. Further information around the devices and data storage needs to be clarified. By moving through each job task, missing cyber-security context information can be further fleshed out by the cyber-security tool/professional. This information will inform further cyber-security analysis and risk mitigation. 17 The left side of the diagram in Figure 8 clearly links the key reasons for the business to protect crop management data with the core task of crop manage- ment. This relationship information keeps forefront the business value protected by any potential security control. A discussion to protect crop management data is needed as it enables the business to maintain a high-quality brand (by timing the harvest) and supports production. The context helps stakeholders assign the right level of resources and importance. 7.1.4 Change in Operating Environment We now demonstrate the SITD model’s ability to handle external changes to a small business, with the example of legislative change in the introduction of Australian Goods and Service Tax (GST). GST is a percentage tax that merchants collect on consumer sales [12]. The collected tax is then passed on to the government in Business Activity Statements (BAS) returns to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Initially, most international sellers were exempt from collection due to the low value of individual orders (such as processed agriculture products in the case study). Subsequently international merchants who achieves a substantial amount of low value sales to Australian customers [12] were also included. The GST collection requirement applies to our case study business. To comply with the GST rule using guidance from ATO [12], the SITD model will be expanded with the following class instances which were not in the case study: • ABN: Data Item (Australian Business Number) • Australian GST Collected: Data Item • Lodge Tax/BAS Return: Job Task • Pay GST: Job Task • Customs Information: Data Item • Customer Invoice: Data Item • ATO: Destination System In addition, the following existing instances are modified: • Sell Processed Product: Job Task – Link to additional instances to comply with GST requirements. • Production & Sale: Engineering Characteristics – Link to the need to lodge additional tax (BAS) returns to the ATO, and the payment of the GST collected using data collected during sales process . The resulting SITD model due to external GST change is illustrated in the Figure 9, with the added instances highlighted in yellow. Note that the 18 SITD structure fundamentally does not change, despite the change in legisla- tive environments. The SITD model is designed such that changes to specific environment factors can be handled within the confines of existing SITD model structure and items. Figure 9: GST introduction for Australian customers resulted in additional instances and links in the small business SITD model, highlighted in yellow. Missing security component are denoted in non-shaded boxes, denoting areas for further exploration to protect the product production business value. Discussion in section 7.1.4. Using the SITD model structure, the missing instances in Figure 9 show up as unshaded items. These instances highlight the impacts that the change has on the business in terms of cyber-security. In this GST example, the SITD diagram shows that the business needs to clarify the channels (technology, job function and person) which the required information and tasks entails. As such, to ensure contiued compliance to the product production and sale, these tools need to be protected proportionate to the business value brought by production. 7.2 Modelling IT Information The case study in Section 7.1 was written from a business operations point of view, and contains little technical information. To emulate, in general, what technical information may be discovered in a small business, we now leverage the small scale IT architectures found in the UK [35]. To be consistent with the previous business operation example of 2 FTE operators, we focus on the micro-companies (1-8 employees) described in the UK study. Figure 10 gives the overall picture. Following the process used in the business operations analysis (Section 7.1.1), components described in the article [35] 2 were assigned to the corresponding 2As the business is currently operating, all identifying information of the small business, individuals, specific products and locations are redacted in the public version of this article to protect their privacy, including citations. Original information and citations were provided for review purposes. 19 SITD classes (e.g. laptop/PC/phone to device class, internet to network con- nection). Any connected classes, according to the SITD model, to the article- identified components that were not discussed in the article were highlighted as missing information in the SITD structure between devices and people. Figure 10: Model depicting micro company (1-8 employees) architecture. Area highlighted in blue defines components discovered by the case study [35]. Any missing information/areas of concern are left unshaded. Discussion in section 7.2 . In Figure 10, relationships have been assumed to facilitate ease of reading. The relationships between individual employees and their devices, while hard to present in a single page pictorially, can be stored in a data repository easily. When the typical micro-company case study architecture is mapped onto the structure of the SITD model, the following topics are highlighted from a cyber-security perspective: 1. Alternative Access Missing for Cloud Backup and Webmail – 20 Cloud backup and webmail are not mentioned in the case study [35]. The business’s understanding of the configuration and the ways both systems allow third party access to the business data needs to be evaluated. The discussion needs to be from both technical (e.g. login security, sharing settings) as well as business process (e.g. terms and conditions, privacy policies) perspectives. The importance of understanding both technical and process aspects is demonstrated in past breaches of misconfigured Amazon S3 buckets [57] and Zoombombing attacks [23]. 2. Unknown device applications and operating systems - A discus- sion around operating systems in use prompts thoughts around the level of support and processes needed to secure these environments. For ex- ample, updating an Android phone and applications is a different process to updating iOS phones. The architecture states that devices are used by both business and personal users. This raises a number of questions. Does the mixed use extend to applications? Are there any applications that are shared with personal use or of untrusted origins? Such cyber hygiene mat- ters are often covered in acceptable use policies in larger enterprises [15] and need to be addressed in small businesses. 3. Sharing the Network – The mixed uses of networks are depicted in both the network connection as well as family members sharing that connection. The blending of personal and business use is often not addressed explic- itly in cyber-analysis today. Ideal control conditions explicitly discourage shared network outside the business, which is unrealistic in a small busi- ness. By recognising a blended scenario, discussion can be held around mitigations based on the situation of the small business worker and sharer. 4. Mobile Network – A phone necessitates a mobile network connection. Most modern phone plans include mobile data. From the case study in- formation, it is unclear whether this network is being used to access the business target systems. Given this network has potential as a backup data connection in the case of an incident, mitigation strategy plan can involve the owner-operator being trained on how to use mobile data to ensure business continuity. 5. BYOD Device – Workers are permitted to use their own devices and network connection to access business systems. Hence data transit security is another area of concern. Given that both data transit and devices are not under the small business control, measures may be warranted to secure data depending upon the sensitivity of the data. 6. Target Systems Security - Given the increase in devices connected to corporate systems, the issue of lateral movement during an incident becomes much more prominent. The breach at a target system (e.g. a cloud provider) can potentially result in a higher impact as attackers can move sideways and onto other devices. A business needs to understand the nature of the connection to each site/system. This can be strengthened 21 by exploring procedural or technical safeguards that can be applied. The fallout of supply chain incidents were made clear with past examples such as NotPetya [21]. 7. Customer Site - Small Office/Home Office (“SOHO”) routers are not typically known for VPN, so in this scenario of connecting to customer site, any work from home employees are most likely connecting via their home network to the customer site. Clarification around any commercial and security implications around this data transit path is needed. From a commercial perspective, business needs to understand whether this path contravenes terms of agreement with customer. Alternatively from a tech- nical mitigation perspective, whether VPN can be set up via the existing corporate network routers can influence risk management decisions. 7.3 Modelling Breach Information To illustrate the use of the SITD model for incident analysis purposes, Maersk’s experience from the NotPetya event is modelled within the SITD model struc- ture. The NotPetya incident from Maersk’s experience is chosen for the following similarities to small business characteristics: • Maersk was “collateral damage” [58] of a wider state attack – Very few small businesses, especially micro-businesses, have sufficient resources (fi- nancial, intellectual property & data) alone to motivate lone targeted at- tacks. Most incidents are likely to be underpinned by an opportunistic element. • The attack came from a Maersk’s supplier – Maersk was compelled to use M.E.Doc accounting software to comply with Urkranian accounting norms [21]. This is reflected in small businesses often having very little negotiation power against, or sometimes in the choice of, their IT supplier relationships. • Maersk uses IT to support the core business activity of logistics – Most small businesses are not technical [6] and employ IT as a tool to increase productivity. IT is a support function, not their core business. The incident’s information was collated using public reports of the incident [21, 22], statements from Maersk’s chairman [58] and accounts of employees involved [44, 3]. 1. A Maersk computer in Odessa (Ukraine) received malicious code through an update from M.E.Doc, a legitimate accounting software. [21] 2. The update contained malicious code, later named NotPetya, which in- cluded exploits Mimikatz and EternalBlue. EternalBlue leveraged an SMB version 1 vulnerability to spread the malicious code to systems across the Maersk network. [44] 22 3. The malicious code, when encountering a non-patched operating system, encrypted the systems. The encryption effectively wiped the system as NotPetya did not have a built-in decryption capability. [44] 4. Maersk workers started seeing computers being reset and locked through- out the corporate network [3]. Attempts to limit damage and stop the outbreak were not successful, including physical disconnections of equip- ment [22]. 5. Workers were sent home as the extent of the computer unavailability be- came apparent [22]. 6. The assessment and recovery process started on 45,000 PCs, 4,000 servers and 2500 applications [3, 58] within Maersk globally. Most of the recov- eries, including cleaning and restarting assets, involved labour-intensive processes. The SITD model illustrates the infrastructure (Figure 11) that enabled the breach, as well as the flow-on human and operational impacts. Figure 11: The Maersk NotPetya incident mapped onto the SITD model with publicly known information, as discussed in Section 7.3. Unshaded denotes areas with unknown components. Dashed arrow lines and numbers in green outline the steps (as listed in Section 7.3) and infrastructure that was involved in the incident. The known information around software trojan from M.E.Docs, the initial point of infection in an office PC and subsequent impact to other Maersk PCs were widely discussed within available sources. These three aspects are recorded in respective Applications and Devices classes. When these elements are plot- ted on the SITD model structure in Figure 11, the roles that the corporate network (Network Connection class) played in disseminating the software are added. This is derived from the fact that NotPetya malware must jump from the originating Office PC to other devices through a network connection. The 23 SITD also shows the knock-on impact to operational servers (Destination Sys- tem class), which in turn led to the dock computer(s) at shipping ports being infected. The links between the paralysis of the corporate servers and the shutdown of dock computers, while hinted at and easily derivable by an IT worker, is not always immediately apparent to a non-technical audience. The SITD model provides a way to visually ‘hop’ within an often invisible IT architecture, thus laying out the severity and spread of an incident. 7.3.1 Missing Breach Information In addition, the SITD model emphasises the unknown elements, (left unshaded) in-spite of the public information about the incident. The model underscores the insufficient information available about the following areas: • The corporate network served as the central point of the outbreak. Fur- ther investigation from the incident could focus on whether there are any controls allowing ecosystem compartmentalisation. (A lack of network segmentation was raised as an existing issue for the company by an IT employee in a post-incident discussion. [3].) • Unknowns around the network connectivity mode of devices (& associated application and tasks) indicate opportunities for future incident response planning. As an example, as part of incident response planning, can each physical site identify key (wireless/wired) router(s) that can isolate an en- tire site? Anecdotally, employees unsuccessfully tried to stop the spread by switching off and/or disconnecting individual workstations in an un- planned manner, not as part of a rehearsed response [21]. • The source of entry needs further investigation. How was access (legiti- mate or not) to Linkos (maker of M.E.Doc) group’s infrastructure granted and/or managed. While this may not be resolved technically, as the mal- ware was part of a legitimate update, the missing information can drive conversations between Maersk and Linkos as part of the supplier/customer relationship and commercial liability issues. Examination of the above points can provide potentially valuable information for future cyber-security tightening or setup. The structure of the SITD model highlights gaps or questions that may be overlooked under the pressure of an active incident and post incident reviews. The SITD model structure ensures that, even under pressure, a systematic examination of available information can be conducted regardless of completeness. 8 Discussion Section 7 shows how the SITD UML model records and maps cyber-security- relevant information for a small business. A business case study, IT architecture 24 case study and breach incident were used to show the SITD model recording security-relevant business, and technical and incident details. Due to the socio- technical nature of cyber-security [40], all 3 types of details support the analysis of a business’ cyber-security posture. Table 2 shows, in detail, how the SITD model design and usage examples demonstrate the fulfilment of design principles set out in Sections 3 and 4. Design Principles Met Needs Section(s) of This Article Modelling Small Business (<20 em- ployees) ✓ 7.1 Modelling Business Point of View Usable for Tool Developers ✓ 5.1 Advantages of UML Business Priorities Focused ✓ 6.2 SITD Submodel: Business 6.3 SITD Submodel: Job Function 6.5 SITD Submodel: Threats 7.1 Modelling Business Point of View Capture Intangible Factors & Rela- tionships ✓ 7.1.3 Task-Based Analysis Allows Incomplete Information ✓ 7.1.3 Task-Based Analysis 7.3.1 Missing Breach Information Language Agnostic ✓ 6.6 Overall SITD Model 7.1.3 Task-Based Analysis 7.3 Modelling Breach Information Technology Agnostic ✓ 7.2 Modelling IT Information Standards, legislation & industry Agnostic ✓ 7.1 Modelling Business Point of View 7.1.4 Change in Operating Environment Enable Cyber-Security Analysis ✓ 7.1.2 Analysing the Result 7.1.3 Task-Based Analysis 7.2 Modelling IT Information 7.3 Modelling Breach Information Table 2: Design principles (section 4) versus proposed model (section 6) com- parison. The SITD model met the principles set out in Sections 3. The modelling of three widely-varying sources of information types demon- strated that the SITD model is capable of modelling different types of busi- nesses, situations and information sources. The SITD model’s adaptability is useful in cyber-security where small businesses have a variety of different char- acteristics, ranging from industry nuances to market disruption. Over the long term, this adaptability helps the SITD model stay relevant during times of change. 25 9 Conclusion We proposed the SITD UML data model as a way to gather and organise small business cyber-security information. Big standards, whilst flexible, lead to big knowledge requirements and resource commitments, making them difficult to adopt for resource-scarce small businesses. The SITD model helps alleviate some barriers faced by small businesses in understanding cyber-security focused security processes and utilising tools currently available. The SITD model proposes a new way of working towards a small business cyber-security posture. The SITD model’s analysis of case studies of a micro agricultural busi- ness, UK micro-businesses’ architecture and NotPetya breach incident shows the capability of the SITD model in capturing and organising security-relevant information. The SITD model highlights the value of cyber-security decisions by linking the decisions to the business’ operational activities, via SITD links between objects. The examples provided above demonstrated the ability of the SITD model to model businesses in varied environments, giving structure to an often qualitative, open-ended cyber-security process. The SITD model’s UML foundation gives a ready channel and a structured way for any prospective solution developers (technical or otherwise) to ensure relevant information is captured and organised. Furthermore, UML can readily be accommodated by technologies that allow databases, thus minimising imple- mentation issues and effort. The SITD model does not seek to replace existing cyber-security standards, but rather fill the existing gaps with respect to small business needs. It is a streamlined way of organising the often informal and piecemeal nature of busi- ness information relevant to a cyber-security posture, facilitating the analysis process. Rather than starting from a technological or risk management per- spective, the SITD model leads discussion from business-centric perspectives. Structurally, the SITD model provides a pathway to connect the business in- formation to IT information. Ultimately, the SITD model serves as a pathway towards a more inclusive small business cyber-security process, by taking into account the needs of both cyber-security solution developers and small businesses. Acknowledgments This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship. This project was conducted under an Approval from the RMIT Human Ethics Committee (Approval Number: 23928). Au- thors’ Note: The business case study, in section 7.1, citations and identifying information in text and figures have been anonymised to protect the privacy of the small business in publication. 26 References [1] Ande, R., Adebisi, B., Hammoudeh, M., Saleem, J.: Inter- net of Things: Evolution and Technologies from a Security Per- spective. Sustain. Cities Soc. 54(February 2019), 101728 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101728 [2] Angeli, C., Valanides, N.: Examining the Effects of Text-Only and Text-and-Visual Instructional Materials on the Achievement of Field- Dependent and Field-Independent Learners During Problem-Solving with Modeling Software. Educ. Technol. Res. Dev. 52(4), 23–36 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02504715 [3] Ashton, G.: Maersk, me & notPetya (Jun 2020), https://gvnshtn.com/ maersk-me-notpetya/, accessed: 01/12/2021 [4] Australian Bureau of Statistics: 1321.0 - Small Business in Australia, 2001 (2001), https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1321.0 [5] Australian Bureau of Statistics: 8167 Selected Characteristics of Australian Business (2019), https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/technology- and-innovation/characteristics-australian-business/2017-18 [6] Australian Bureau of Statistics: 8165.0 - Counts of Australian Businesses, Including Entries and Exits, June 2015 to June 2019 (2020), https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/ 8165.0June2015toJune2019?OpenDocument [7] Australian Bureau of Statistics: Australian Industry by Divi- sion, Australian Industry, Financial Year 2019-20 (May 2021), https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/industry-overview/ australian-industry/2019-20/81550DO001_201920.xls [8] Australian Cyber Security Centre, Australian Signals Di- rectorate: Cyber Security and Australian Small Businesses (2020), https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-07/ ACSCSmallBusinessSurveyReport.pdf [9] Australian Cyber Security Centre, Australian Signals Directorate: Essential Eight Maturity Model (2021), https://www.cyber.gov.au/ sites/default/files/2021-10/PROTECT-EssentialEightMaturityModel% 28October2021%29.pdf [10] Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman: Small Busi- ness Counts (2020), https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021- 11/ASBFEOSmallBusinessCountsDec2020v2_0.pdf [11] Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman: Small Busi- ness Matters (2023), https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023- 10/SmallBusinessMatters_June2023.pdf 27 [12] Australian Taxation Office: International Tax for Business (2021), https://www.ato.gov.au/businesses-and-organisations/international-tax- for-business, accessed: 28/11/2023 [13] Bada, M., Nurse, J.: Developing Cybersecurity Education and Awareness Programmes for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs). Inf. Com- put. Secur. 27(3), 393–410 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1108/ICS-07-2018- 0080 [14] Blanco, C.F., Sarasa, R.G., Sanclemente, C.O.: Effects of Visual and Tex- tual Information in Online Product Presentations: Looking for the Best Combination in Website Design. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 19(6), 668–686 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2010.42 [15] Center for Internet Security: Learn about CIS Controls v8 (2023), https: //www.cisecurity.org/controls/v8, accessed: 20/11/2023 [16] Chen, P.P.S.: The Entity-Relationship Model—Toward a Unified View of Data. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 1(1), 9–36 (1976). https://doi.org/10.1145/320434.320440 [17] Chiappetta, M.: Uber Eats Demand Soars Due To COVID-19 Crisis. Forbes (Mar 2020), https://www.forbes.com/sites/marcochiappetta/2020/03/25/ uber-eats-demand-soars-due-to-covid-19-crisis [18] Colbaugh, R., Glass, K.: Proactive Defense for Evolving Cyber Threats. Proc. 2011 IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informatics, ISI 2011 pp. 125–130 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2011.5984062 [19] Day, J.D., Zimmermann, H.: The OSI Reference Model. Proc. IEEE 71(12), 1334–1340 (1983), http://www.inf.ufes.br/~zegonc/material/ Redes_de_Computadores/TheOSIReferenceModel.pdf [20] Department for Business Energy & Industrial Strat- egy: Business Population Estimates for the UK and Re- gions 2021 (2021), https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1019907/ 2021_Business_Population_Estimates_for_the_UK_and_regions_Statistical_Release.pdf [21] Greenberg, A.: The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating Cy- berattack in History. Wired Mag. (Aug 2018), https://www.wired.com/ story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/ [22] Greenberg, A.: Sandworm : A New Era of Cyberwar and the Hunt for the Kremlin’s Most Dangerous Hackers. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group (2019) [23] Greenberg, A.: Why Insider ‘Zoom Bombs’ Are So Hard to Stop. Wired Magazine (Mar 2021), https://www.wired.com/story/zoombomb-inside- jobs/ 28 [24] International Organization for Standardization, International Electrotech- nical Commission: Information technology - Open Distributed Process- ing - Unified Modeling Language (UML) Version 1.4.2 (2005), https: //www.omg.org/spec/UML/ISO/19501/PDF [25] Maddux, J.E., Rogers, R.W.: Protection Motivation and Self-Efficacy: A Revised Theory of Fear Appeals and Attitude Change. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 19(5), 469–479 (1983). https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(83)90023-9 [26] Microsoft: 10 Benefits of Data Modeling Tools (2023), https: //powerbi.microsoft.com/en-us/what-are-the-advantages-of-data- modeling-tools/, accessed: 09/11/2023 [27] Microsoft: What is DevSecOps? (2023), https://www.microsoft.com/ en-us/security/business/security-101/what-is-devsecops, accessed: 01/12/2023 [28] Miles, R.E., Snow, C.C., Meyer, A.D., Jr, H.J.C.: Organizational strategy, structure, and process. Acad. Manag. Rev. 3(3), 546 (1978) [29] Mouton, F., Malan, M.M., Leenen, L., Venter, H.S.: Social Engineering Attack Framework. 2014 Inf. Secur. South Africa - Proc. ISSA 2014 Conf. (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSA.2014.6950510 [30] National Cyber Security Centre: Asset Management (May 2021), https: //www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/asset-management, accessed: 13/12/2021 [31] National Institute of Standards and Technology: NIST Frame- work for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (2018). https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018 [32] National Institute of Standards and Technology: Security and Pri- vacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations (2020). https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5 [33] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): Small Businesses, Job Creation And Growth: Facts, Obstacles And Best Practices (Jun 1997), https://www.oecd.org/cfe/smes/2090740.pdf [34] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): Key Facts Survey of Adult Skills ( PIAAC ): Full Selection of Indicator - UK, US, Australia and OECD Data Table (2018), https://gpseducation.oecd.org/ IndicatorExplorer, accessed: 15/03/2021 [35] Osborn, E., Simpson, A.: On Small-Scale IT Users’ System Architectures and Cyber Security: A UK Case Study. Comput. Secur. 70(Section 3), 27–50 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.001 29 [36] Park, J., Campbell, J.M.: U.S. Small Business’s Philanthropic Con- tribution to Local Community: Stakeholder Salience and Social Iden- tity Perspectives. J. Nonprofit Public Sect. Mark. 30(3), 317–342 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2018.1452823 [37] Redacted: Redacted. Redacted [38] Redacted: Redacted, Redacted [39] Renaud, K.: How Smaller Businesses Struggle With Security Advice. Com- puter Fraud and Security 8, 10–18 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361- 3723(16)30062-8 [40] Schneier, B.: The Importance of Security Engineering. IEEE Security and Privacy 10(5), 88 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2012.132 [41] Scott, M., Bruce, R.: Five Stages of Growth in Small Business. Long Range Plann. 20(3), 45–52 (1987). https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-6301(87)90071-9 [42] Service, O., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., Algate, F., Gallagher, R., Nguyen, S., Ruda, S., Sanders, M., Pelenur, M., Gyani, A., Harper, H., Reinhard, J., Kirkman, E.: EAST Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioural Insights (2014), https://www.bi.team/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/BIT- Publication-EAST_FA_WEB.pdf, accessed:10/12/2021 [43] Small Business Digital Taskforce: Small Business Digital Taskforce, Re- port to Government (2018), https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/ 2021-07/p2018-191027-sbdt-report.pdf [44] Sood, K., Hurley, S.: NotPetya Technical Analysis (2017), https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/petrwrap-ransomware-technical- analysis-triple-threat-file-encryption-mft-encryption-credential-theft/ [45] Standards Australia Limited: AS ISO/IEC 27001 Australian Standard Information Technology - Security Techniques - Infor- mation Security Management Systems - Requirements (2015), https://infostore.saiglobal.com/en-au/Standards/AS-ISO-IEC-27001- 2015-111199_SAIG_AS_AS_232620/ [46] Street, C.T., Meister, D.B.: Small Business Growth and Internal Trans- parency: The Role of Information Systems. MIS Q. Manag. Inf. Syst. 28(3), 473–506 (2004). https://doi.org/10.2307/25148647 [47] Sullivan-Taylor, B., Branicki, L.: Creating Resilient SMEs: Why One Size Might Not Fit All. Int. J. Prod. Res. 49(18), 5565–5579 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2011.563837 [48] Tam, T., Rao, A., Hall, J.: The Invisible COVID-19 Small Business Risks: Dealing with the Cyber-Security Aftermath. Digit. Gov. Res. Pract. 2(2) (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3436807 30 [49] Tam, T., Rao, A., Hall, J.: The Good, the Bad and the Missing: A Narrative Review of Cyber-Security Implications for Australian Small Businesses. Comput. Secur. 109, 102385 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102385 [50] Tan, T., Maynard, S., Ahmad, A., Ruighaver, T.: Information Secu- rity Governance: A Case Study of the Strategic Context of Informa- tion Security. In: Pacific Asia Converence Inf. Syst. vol. 43. Association for Information Systems Electronic Library (AISeL), Langkawi (2017), http://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2017/43 [51] The Mitre Corporation: Mitre Att&ck (2019), https://attack.mitre.org/, accessed: 01/03/2021 [52] The Mitre Corporation: CVE (2023), https://cve.mitre.org/, accessed: 14/11/2023 [53] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime (2013), http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/ UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_STUDY_210213.pdf [54] Von Solms, R., Van Niekerk, J.: From Information Secu- rity to Cyber Security. Comput. Secur. 38, 97–102 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004 [55] Watson, C., Zaw, T., Andriushchenko, I., Justiniano, G.M., Tesauro, M.: OWASP Automated Threat Handbook Web Applications. OWASP, Bel Air, United States (2018), https://owasp.org/www-pdf-archive/ Automated-threat-handbook.pdf [56] Williams, E.J., Hinds, J., Joinson, A.N.: Exploring Susceptibility to Phish- ing in the Workplace. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 120(June 2017), 1–13 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.06.004 [57] WizCase Cyber Research Team: Over 80 US Municipalities’ Sensitive In- formation, Including Resident’s Personal Data, Left Vulnerable in Mas- sive Data Breach (2021), https://www.wizcase.com/blog/us-municipality- breach-report/, accessed: 13/01/2021 [58] World Economic Forum: Securing a Common Future in Cy- berspace (2018), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tqe3K3D7TnI, ac- cessed: 05/01/2022 Appendix - Reading the Model: UML Conven- tions Our model is highly reliant on UML. Here is an example to show how to inter- prete UML class and object diagrams. 31 Class (drawn as rectangles) defines independent entities or objects. From these classes, associations (drawn as lines) are used to illustrate relationships between classes. A class can exist on its own but associations must have a beginning and an ending class (which can be the same class). Classes convey structural information only (i.e. the location of the class in relation to other classes). When an instance of a class is defined, it is noted as an object. Certain characteristics of the class are captured as attributes, primarily text fields within each class. Enumerations, which restrict the possible values in an attribute, are also defined. Despite their similarity in appearance to classes, enumerations do not play a role in the structure of the model. Figure 12 illustrates the class diagram for a car for example. Figure 12: Example class showing the class structure of a car in relation to its tires using UML. The ‘1..4’ notation specifies that a car can have 1 to 4 tyres. Described in section 9. This defines that structurally a car must have a minimum of 1 tyre to a maximum of 4 as a relationship. These tyres do not need to be the same on the same car (think early bicycles with 2 different size wheels). It also states the attributes of cars and tyres (generally attributes are not mandatory unless otherwise specified). At this stage, it is not instantiated i.e. it does not describe a specific car, but rather a relationship between cars and tyres. In describing individual cars e.g. John’s car with four tyres, the object diagram is given in Figure 13. Figure 13: Example object diagram showing how an instance of a car can be represented using UML. Described in section 9. For further information on UML, refer to UML ISO specification documen- tation [24]. 32