arXiv:0904.1616v1 [cs.CR] 9 Apr 2009 M athem aticaland StatisticalOpportunitiesin CyberSecurity Juan M ezay ScottCam pbellz D avid Baileyx LBNL-1667E M arch 2009 A bstract The role ofm athem atics in a com plex system such as the Internethasyet to be deeply explored. In this paper,we sum m arize som e ofthe im portantand pressing problem sin cybersecurity from the viewpointofopen science environm ents.W e startby posing the question \W hatfundam ental problem s exist within cyber security research that can be helped by advanced m athem atics and statistics?" O ur rstand m ostim portantassum ption isthataccessto real-world data isnecessary to understand large and com plex system s like the Internet. O ursecond assum ption is that m any proposed cybersecurity solutionscould critically dam ageboth theopennessand theproductivity of scienti c research.Afterexam ining a range ofcybersecurity problem s,we com e to the conclusion thatthe eld ofcybersecurity posesa rich setofnew and exciting research opportunitiesfor the m athem aticaland statisticalsciences. This work was supported by the D irector,O  ce ofScience,ofthe U .S.D epartm ent ofEnergy under Contract N o.D E-AC02-05CH 11231. yH igh Perform ance Com puting R esearch,Lawrence Berkeley N ationalLaboratory (JCMeza@lbl.gov). zN ationalEnergy R esearch Scienti c Com puting Center(SCampbell@lbl.gov). xH igh Perform ance Com puting R esearch,Lawrence Berkeley N ationalLaboratory (DHBailey@lbl.gov). 1 2 1 Introduction A cyber security incident ofsom e sort m akes the news headlines on an alm ost daily basis. The exam plesarenum erous,from individualusersinform ation loss,to worm sand com puterviruses,to largescalecrim inalbehaviorprecipitated by organized crim eand nation states.M orerecently [22], the large-scale use ofbotnets for distributing e-m ailspam ,distributed denialofservice attacks, and distributing other m alware has led to an inform alalliance ofcom puter security experts from across the world. Not surprisingly, the rise in cyber security incidents is due in large part to the rise in the use ofcom puters and the Internet in allareas ofsociety. In fact,according to [1], \Incessantscanningofhostsby attackerslookingforvulnerable servershasbecom e a factofInternet life". Therefore it com es as no surprise that scienti c research has also been a ected by cyber security problem s. Indeed,because so m uch ofscience has em braced and com e to rely so heavily on com puting resources,itisparticularly vulnerable to cybersecurity issues. W hile the growth in com putational,network,and data resources has com pletely changed the way that basic scienti c research is conducted,this has in generalnot been re ected in the way thatcom puterscience hasaddressed challenges facing cybersecurity research.A recentreportby the NationalResearch Council[15]states that,\research can produce a better understanding of why cyberspace is as vulnerable as it is and that such research can lead to new technologies and policies and their e ective im plem entation,m aking cyberspace safer and m ore secure." However, the com m ittee was also carefulto m ention that, \there are no single or even sm allnum ber of silver bullets that can solve the cybersecurity problem ". At alm ost the sam e tim e,a grass roots com m unity e ort recently released a report [10] that outlines several areas for a science-based cyber security research program . The report outlined three focus areas: predictive awareness for secure system s,self-protective data and software,and trustworthy system s from trustworthy com ponents.The three focusareaswere furthersubdivided into speci c research areas. A sim ilar report[9]highlighted threem ajorchallenge areas:m odeling large-scale networks,threatdiscovery, and network dynam ics. Interestingly,the role ofm athem atics in a com plex system such as the Internet has yet to be deeply explored. W illinger and Paxson [36]pointed out as early as 1998 that, \the Internet is a new world,one where engineering wins out over tradition-conscious m athem atics and requires paradigm shiftsthatfavora com bination ofm athem aticalbeauty and high potentialforcontributing to pragm atic Internetengineering." In thatsam e spirit,we would like to ask \W hatfundam ental problem s exist within cyber security research that can be helped by advanced m athem atics and statistics?" In this paper,we sum m arize som e ofthe m ore im portant and pressing problem s in cyber security from the viewpoint of open science environm ents, and highlight those which we believe should be ofinterestto the generalm athem aticalsciencescom m unity. W e wish to stress the im portance ofusing a science-based approach. O ur rst and m ost im - portant assum ption is that,as in other scienti c elds,access to real-world data is necessary to understand large and com plex system s. Applying m athem aticalm odelsand advanced algorithm s to thisreal-world data,itshould be possible to develop validated predictive m odelsthatcan then M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 3 be used to develop m ore robust applications for workable cyber security. W ith the rise ofcyber security incidentsand m ore persistentand strongeradversaries,itm akessense to m ove away from current ad-hoc,reactive m ethodologies and lim ited testing to m ore rigorous and repeatable ap- proaches. O ur second assum ption is that m any proposed cyber security solutions could critically dam age both the openness and the productivity ofscienti c research. As such,we want to em - phasize that using security m odels from other areas (e.g. the classi ed sectors) and relaxing the conditionsusually resultsin a m odelthatisinherently detrim entalto open science. W e also note thatm any ofthechallengesin cybersecurity arisefrom characteristicsoftheInternetthatm akeit di cultto m odel,such as:1)the self-sim ilarstructure ofnetwork tra c,2)the inherentdynam ic nature ofthe Internet,and 3) the rapid growth in the Internet,both in term s ofthe num ber of com ponentsand size ofthe tra c. Thispaperisdivided into three sections: 1)data,2)m odeling,and 3)applications. Section 2 m ake the case for good raw data asthe foundation forbasing cybersecurity m odels and policies. Section 3 outlines som e ofthe m ajor areas where im proved m odeling isneeded. The nalsection describestheuseofsom em odelsand data to im plem entapplicationsthathavebeen used to detect and deteradversaries.In allthreeareas,wehighlightsom eofthem athem aticalopportunitiesthat ariseasresearchershavestudied theseareas,including recentadvancesusing statisticaltechniques. 2 T he Im portance ofD ata The need for trace and log data for scienti c analysis is necessary not only to create accurate m odels, but to provide repeatability and veri cation of results. In addition, ensuring that the data’sintegrity ism aintained throughoutthe lifetim e ofitsintended use isim perative in orderto beableto validatetheresultsofany scienti cm odel.Asa fundam entalbuildingblock ofrepeatable science,we see the lack offreely available raw data asan issue thatisboth criticalforsuccessand a problem that can be addressed through better m athem atical m odeling and techniques. This section deals with three areas that lay the foundation for alm ost allofthe cyber security defense m echanism sin placetoday:1)theneed forreal-world data on which to basenetwork m odels,2)the need for developing m ethodsthat ensure data integrity,and 3) the need to handle large am ounts ofdata in realoralm ostrealtim e. 2.1 D ata A nonym ization and C leaning The lack ofpublic data setsfornetwork m odeling hasbeen identi ed asa key weaknessin current networking research [30]. In addition, m ost intrusion detection system s are based on anom aly detection for which one of the key assum ptions is the availability of good training data. The generally accepted assum ptions for the training data include: 1) attack-free data is available,2) sim ulated data is representative,and 3) network tra c is static. G ates and Taylor [13],however, M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 4 challenge these assum ptions and argue that m ost of these assum ptions m ay not hold in m any situations. M any sites are reluctant to publicly release network data for a variety of reasons including con dentiality,privacy,and security issues. G iven the need for high-quality data however,som e researchers have studied the question of how best to anonym ize or sanitize the data so that it can be released publicly. In allofthese cases,there is an inherent tradeo between the need to ensuresecurity and privacy and theneed forhigh-quality data thatstillrepresentsreal-world tra c data. Thisisknown as the utility versussecurity trade-o [33]. Severalapproaches for sanitizing data have been suggested with variousdegreesofsuccess[2]. Itisalso im portantto considerhow e ective a particularanonym ization policy isand therehavebeen som ee ortsto m easurethis[ 20]. The diversity oftechniques used in tackling the data indicate that a m ore system atic approach m ightbe applied to thisproblem as wellas m ethodsfor m axim izing a particular utility function. Theapplication ofdata anonym ization m ethodsisnotrestricted to raw data however.Higherlayer abstractions such as NetFlow records (Cisco IO S NetFlow. http://www.cisco.com /go/net ow) or Bro connection logs[29]are also extrem ely powerfulforlarge scale m easurem entand m odeling. In addition to releasing (possibly anonym ized) realdata,there are other ways ofgenerating test data { synthesis and reference data. However,generating synthetic data can be problem atic in term sofresearch value [23],while reference data (data recorded atlocationssuch ashoney pots which have no privacy constraints) m ay not ful llthe needs ofthe researcher due to the speci c nature ofthe tra c [2]. 2.2 D ata Integrity Asthedata setsin sciencegrow and asourdependenceon them forunderstandingscienceincreases, thereisa criticalneed forensuring thatdata m aintainsitsintegrity overthelifetim eofitsintended use. By integrity here,we m ean the trustworthiness ofeither the data or resources and includes data integrity (content) and origin integrity (the source ofthe data). As described by Bishop[3], integrity m echanism sfallinto two m ain classes:prevention m echanism sand detection m echanism s. New m ethods willneed to be developed that can ensure that the data being generated by large experim entalfacilities such as the Large Hadron Collider,ITER,or any ofthe large accelerators, m aintainsitsintegrity during thecourseoftheanalysisofsaid data.Likewise,asprogram ssuch as the D epartm entofEnergy’s Scienti c D iscovery through Advanced Com puting (SciDAC) expand towardsexascale facilities,the data setsgenerated by the codesthatthe SciDAC program support can beexpected to also grow in size.Thissim ulation outputwillalso requirem ethodsform aintain- ing data integrity.O neinteresting new approach forsecuring theprovenanceofdata wassuggested by [4]. They note that provenance can be m odeled as a causality graph with annotations,where the causality graph describes the process that produced the data’s present state. As such,the graph can be represented as an im m utable directed acyclic graph (DAG ).Although,they present a security solution,they also note thatm ore research isrequired to constructa security m odelfor causalgraphs. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 5 2.3 R eal-tim e data In orderto respond quickly to a cybersecurity attack,organizationsneed to analyze high-volum es oftra c data and detectanom aliesin realtim e.D regeretal.[8]cite som e exam plesfrom two op- erationalcasesthatconsisted ofnetworkswith tensofthousandsofhosts,transferring2-3 terabytes ofdata/day and 44,000 packets/sec on average.Som e interesting work using statisticaltechniques such assequentialhypothesistesting hasshown thatthisispossible[17].Thebasicidea isto m odel accesses to localIP addresses as a random walk on one oftwo stochastic processes,correspond- ing respectively to a benign and a m alicious process. The use ofsequentialhypothesis testing is intriguing because it can be used to establish m athem aticalboundson the expected perform ance ofthe algorithm . W hile this work is quite prom ising,the authors point out that their work only focused on the detection ofan attack from a single rem ote address. New m athem aticalm odels willbeneeded to determ ine whethera coordinated attack from a setofrem ote addressesistaking place.In addition,asnetworksincrease in bandwidth and the num berofhostsincrease,itisclear that the data sets that need to be analyzed willalso grow,requiring new m athem aticalm ethods thatcan scale with the tra c data. 3 M odeling 3.1 Internet M odeling M odeling the Internet is well-known to be a di cult problem [11,28]. Som e of the di culties include the im m ense heterogeneity ofthe Internet and the rapid changes over tim e. Floyd and Paxson [11]proposed two strategiesfordeveloping m eaningfulsim ulationsin thefaceofthesedi - culties:searching forinvariantsand judiciously exploring thesim ulation param eterspace.In term s ofinvariants,Floyd and Paxson suggestam ong others:diurnalpatternsofactivity,self-sim ilarity, heavy-tailed distributions,and log-norm alconnection sizes.Searching fortheseinvariantscan then be viewed as a problem in estim ating the correct set ofparam eters from the data. The second strategy proposed,that ofjudiciously exploring the param eter space was proposed as a way to cope with the heterogeneity and change in the Internet architecture. Exploring the sim ulation param eterspace can also be fram ed asa m athem aticalproblem . For exam ple,one way isto pose thisasa problem in the design and analysisofcom puterexperim ents,forwhich there isalready a greatdealofliterature.Asthe num berofparam etersincrease though,thisapproach can be quite lim iting. Therefore,techniques for determ ining which param eters are the m ost im portant for a particular m odelor determ ining the sensitivity ofthe sim ulation to certain param eters willneed to be developed.Finally,one can also view thisasan optim ization problem in which one seeksto m inim ize certain behaviorasde ned by an appropriate costfunction. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 6 3.2 StatisticalM odels Network tra c is often m odeled as a Poisson process because it has good theoreticalproperties. Internettra c,however,hasbeen shown to have som e very com plex statisticalproperties[6,31]. In fact,m any studies have shown thatsim ple Poisson m odels do not hold for realnetwork tra c including both localarea and widearea network tra c.Severalstudies[21,37]haveshown instead thatlocalarea network can bem odeled m uch betterasa self-sim ilarprocess.An interesting study on Internettra c data thatdescribesthesephenom ena wasprovided by Cleveland and Sun [6].In addition to an excellent description ofthe problem ,Cleveland and Sun suggest severalchallenges for handling tra c data including: statisticaltools and m odels for pointprocesses,m arked point processes,and tim eseriesthataccountfornonstationarity,persistence,and distributionswith long uppertails,2)theoreticaland em piricalexploitationsofthesuperposition ofInternettra c,and 3) integration ofstatisticalm odelswith network sim ulators.An excellentbibliography on self-sim ilar tra c m odeling and analysiscan be found in [18]. Paxson and Floyd [27]suggest that the Poisson-based m odels should also be abandoned for wide-area tra c. In his studies ofdata sets from the teletra c industry,Resnick [32]noted that tra c data often exhibit m any non-standard characteristics such as heavy tails and long range dependence.Healsodescribed severalestim ation m ethodsfortheanalysisofheavy tailed tim eseries including param eter estim ation and m odelidenti cation m ethods for autoregressions and m oving averages. However, in the discussion that followed Resnick’s paper, W illinger and Paxson [35] argued persuasively for using structuralm odels that take into account the context in which the data arose as opposed to the black box m odeling approach that is m ore com m only used. Clearly there is a need for further research and developm ent of statistical techniques and m ethods for e ectively handling phenom ena such asheavy tailsand long-range dependence thatarise in cyber security data. 4 N etw ork Intrusion and A ttack R esponse Network intrusion and attack detection typically results in the application ofa successfulm odel builtfrom realworld data. Forexam ple ifone hasa working m odelofhow an externaladversary m ight scan one or m ore hosts on a localnetwork,one can build a sim ple detector based on this. Thedecision to build dependson questionsofscale,tim eand threatm odel.Scalem ightbea single host,a localnetwork event or even an organized entity with hundreds ofthousands ofsystem s. Each notion ofscale describes (when taken with a tem poralcom ponent) a problem space in cy- ber security. O ne com m only used strategy for detection is through anom aly detection,with the explicit assum ption that any m alicious behavior isanom alous [13]. As a result,m any approaches foranom aly detection have been proposed including,supportvector regression [24],k-m eans[19], m ultivariate adaptive regression splines [26],K alm an lters [34],and sequentialhypothesis test- ing [17].Asthedata setsizesincreaseand theneed to m orequickly detectintrusions,m orerobust, accurate,and e cientalgorithm swillalm ostcertainly be required. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 7 4.1 A ttack D etection Currentstate ofthe artin attack detection providesm any areasthatcan be assisted by im prove- m ents to m odelor algorithm design. Network intrusion detection has traditionally been focused on identifying attackers who are seeking inform ation about internalsystem s and services,som e- tim es over large address spaces or large tim e periods. A fundam entalcom ponent ofthis is scan detection where one orm ore rem ote network system slook over addressrangesto survey available services.To do thisan adversary needsto scan som e range ofaddressspace.Single hostdetection has proven to be predictably accurate via sequentialprobability testing by Jung et al.[17],but therearesigni cantareasforim provem entin thedetection ofdistributed scanning,seeforexam ple G ates[14]. Understanding how to representboth attack and defense isessentialfordeveloping a workable strategy. Exam plesofthisthatm ightbe extendable via a m ore com plete analysisofthe problem space are [7,25],which look at m odeling an intrusion detection system ’s observable attack space aswellasoptim alplacem entstrategies.Forexam ple,M odelo-Howard [25]proposed a new m ethod based on a Bayesian network m odelthatcan characterizetherelationship between attack stepsand detectors.Thisresulted in an algorithm thatcould evaluate the e ectofdetectorcon guration on system security. A question that was left for future work was whether the solution was scalable to larger attack graphs and m ore detectors. Sim ilarly,Collins [7]argues that attacks should be viewed asa design speci cation,wheretheattackerisan engineerwith speci ed goals.Hisproposed solution involvesestim ating a detection surfacevia m ultiple M onte Carlo runsto build up a m odel for the probability ofdetection. This naturally leads to the question ofwhich m odels work best for di erent attack scenarios and how to best estim ate them so as to reduce the num ber offalse positiveswhile stilldetecting the true attacks. 4.2 A utom ated A ttack R esponse Recently,there hasbeen considerable work on developing capabilitiesto auto detectattacksbased on both network and system behavior in order to reduce the tim e between attack detection and response. Autogeneration ofnetwork signatures based on protocoland attack heuristicshas been explored by Yegneswaran etal.[38,39].System calldeviationsbased on staticand dynam icanalysis ofdownloaded binarieshave also been studied by a num berofpeople including Christodorescu et al.[5]. 4.3 C om plex System s and O ther N ovelA pproaches O thertypesofm odelshaverecently been proposed.Forexam ple,Forrestand Hofm eyr[12,16]have described m odels for network intrusion detection and virus detection based on an im m unological M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 8 distinction between \selfand \nonself." Using the analogy between an im m une system they have studied problem sin com putervirusdetection,host-based intrusion detection,autom ated response, and network intrusion detection.Forthe network intrusion detection study,the system wastested on twom onthsofnetwork tra cdatacollected on asubnetof50com putersattheCom puterScience departm entattheUniversity ofNew M exico.W hileprelim inary,theresultsseem prom isingin that the false positive rate wason the orderoftwo perday and thesystem wasalso able to successfully detectallseven intrusion incidentsthatwere inserted into the system . Another interesting approach was proposed by Zou et al.[41]. They proposed an adaptive defense principle based on m inim izing a particular cost function. The cost function depended on the attach severity, attack tra c and som e other m etrics that are determ ined by the types of attacks.They also presented a system design based on thisapproach to defend againstSYN ood D D osattack and Internetworm infection. Finally,Zhou et al.[40]have proposed severalnovelalert correlation algorithm s for network intrusion detection that reduce the num ber offalse alerts.The basic building block ofthe m odel is a logicalform ula called a capability. They use the notion ofcapability to abstract consistently and precisely alllevels ofaccesses obtained by the attacker in each step ofa m ultistage intrusion. The correlation algorithm isbased on a new setsearching algorithm thatcapturesthe case where m ultiple earlier attacks together supporta new attack. The experim entalresultsofthe correlator using severalintrusion datasetsdem onstrate thattheapproach ise ective in both alertfusion and alertcorrelation and hasthe ability to correlate alertsofcom plex m ultistage intrusions. 5 C onclusions In this paper,we presented som e ofwhat we believe are the m ost im portant problem s in cyber security foropen scienceenvironm entsand highlighted thoseareaswherem athem aticsand statistics could provide new approachesand solutions.The use ofm athem aticsand statistics in this eld is relatively new and m uch rem ainsto bedone.W e also believethatthetypeofm athem aticsneeded to addressproblem sin cybersecurity willlikely com e from the use ofnon-traditionalm ethodsor techniques. In sum m ary,to paraphrase from W illinger and Paxson [36],we believe that the eld ofcybersecurity posesa rich setofnew and exciting research opportunitiesforthe m athem atical and statisticalsciences. R eferences [1] M ark Allm an,Vern Paxson,and Je Terrell. A briefhistory ofscanning. In IM C ’07: Pro- ceedings ofthe 7th ACM SIG CO M M conference on Internetm easurem ent,pages77{82,New M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 9 York,NY,USA,2007.ACM . [2] M .Bishop,R.Crawford,B.Bhum iratana,L.Clark,and K .Levitt.Som eproblem sin sanitizing network data.In 15th IEEE InternationalW orkshopson EnablingTechnologies:Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprise,pages307{312,2006. [3] M attBishop.Com puter Security Artand Science.Addison W esley,2003. [4] UriBraun, Avraham Shinnar,and M argo Seltzer. Securing provenance. In HO TSEC’08: Proceedings ofthe 3rd conference on Hot topics in security,pages 1{5,Berkeley,CA,USA, 2008.USENIX Association. [5] M .Christodorescu,S.Seshia,S.Jha,D .Song,and R.E.Bryant. Sem antics-aware m alware detection.In IEEE Sym posium on Security and Privacy,June 2005. [6] W .S.Cleveland and D on X.Sun.Internettra c data.JournalAm erican StatisticalAssocia- tion,95:979{985,2000. Reprinted in Statistics in the 21stCentury ,edited by A.E.Raftery, M .A.Tanner,and M .T.W ells,Chapm an & Hall/CRC,New York,2002. [7] M .Collins and M .Reiter. O n the lim its ofpayload-oblivious network attack detection. In RecentAdvances in Intrusion D etection,M ay 2008. [8] Holger D reger,Anja Feldm ann,Vern Paxson,and Robin Som m er. O perationalexperiences with high-volum e network intrusion detection. In CCS ’04: Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on Com puterand com m unicationssecurity,pages2{11,New York,NY,USA,2004. ACM . [9] D anielM .D unlavy,Bruce Hendrickson,and Tam ara G .K olda. M athem aticalchallenges in cybersecurity. Technical Report SAND 2009-0805, Sandia National Laboratories, February 2009. [10] CharlieCatlett(Ed.).A scienti cresearch and developm entapproach tocybersecurity.Report subm itted to the U.S.D epartm entofEnergy,2008. [11] S.Floyd and V.Paxson. D i culties in sim ulating the internet. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,9(4):392{403,Aug.2001. [12] Stephanie Forrestand Steven A.Hofm eyr.Im m unology asinform ation processing.In D esign Principlesforthe Im m une System and O therD istributed Autonom ousSystem s,edited by L.A. Segeland I.Cohen.Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences ofCom plexity,pages 361{387. O xford University Press,2000. [13] Carrie G ates and CarolTaylor. Challenging the anom aly detection paradigm : a provocative discussion.In NSPW ’06: Proceedings ofthe 2006 workshop on new security paradigm s,pages 21{29,New York,NY,USA,2007.ACM . [14] Carrrie G ates. Coordinated scan detection. In 16th AnnualNetwork and D istributed System Security Sym posium ,San D iego,CA,February 8{11 2009.InternetSociety. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 10 [15] Seym our E.G oodm an and Herbert S.Lin, editors. Toward a Safer and M ore Secure Cy- berspace.NationalAcadem iesPress,W ashington,D C,2007.Com m ittee on Im proving Cyber- security Research in the United States,Com puterScience and Telecom m unications Board. [16] Steve Hofm eyr and S.Forrest. Im m unity by design: An arti cialim m une system . In Pro- ceedings ofthe G enetic and Evolutionary Com putation Conference,San Francisco,CA,1999. M organ-K aufm ann. [17] Jaeyeon Jung,Vern Paxson,ArthurW .Berger,and HariBalakrishnan.Fastportscan detection using sequentialhypothesistesting.In Proc.IEEE Sym posium on Security and Privacy,pages 211{225,9{12 M ay 2004. [18] F.P.K elly,S.Zachary,I.Ziedins,W alterW illinger,M urad S.Taqqu,and Ashok Erram illi.A BibliographicalG uideto Self-Sim ilarTra cand Perform ance M odelingforM odern High-Speed Networks,pages339{366. Clarendon Press,1996. [19] AnukoolLakhina,M ark Crovella,and ChristopheD iot.M ining anom aliesusing tra cfeature distributions.In Proceedings SIG CO M M ’05,Philadelphia,PA,August22{26 2005.ACM . [20] K iran Lakkaraju and Adam Slagell. Evaluating the utility ofanonym ized network traces for intrusion detection.In Proceedings SECURECO M M 2008,Istanbul,Turkey,Septem ber22-25 2008. [21] W illE.Leland,M urad S.Taqqu,W alterW illinger,and D anielV.W ilson.O n the self-sim ilar nature ofethernettra c (extended version).IEEE/ACM Trans.Netw.,2(1):1{15,1994. [22] John M arko .Com puterexpertsunite to huntworm .The New York Tim es,M arch 19,2009. [23] John M cHugh.Testing intrusion detection system s:A critique ofthe 1998 and 1999 DARPA o -lineintrusion detection system evaluation asperform ed by Lincoln Laboratory.ACO Trans- actions on Inform ation and System Security,3(4):262{294,Nov.2000. [24] M ariyam M irza,JoelSom m ers,PaulBarford,and Xiaojin Zhu.A m achine learning approach to tcp throughput prediction. In Proceedings SIG M ETRICS’07,San D iego,CA,June 2007. ACM . [25] G .M odelo-Howard,S.Bagchi,and G .Lebanon. D eterm ining placem ent ofintrusion detec- torsfora distributed application through bayesian network m odeling. In RecentAdvances in Intrusion D etection,M ay 2008. [26] SrinivasM ukkam ala,Andrew H.Sung,Ajith Abraham ,and Vitorino Ram os.Intrusion detec- tion system susing adaptive regression splines.In ICEIS (3),pages26{33,2004. [27] V.Paxson and S.Floyd. W ide area tra c: the failure of poisson m odeling. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,3(3):226{244,June 1995. [28] V.Paxson and S.Floyd. W hy we don’tknow how to sim ulate the internet. In Proc.W inter Sim ulation Conference,pages1037{1044,7{10 D ecem ber1997. [29] Vern Paxson. Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in realtim e. In Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Security Sym posium ,Jan.1998. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009) 11 [30] Vern Paxson.Strategiesforsound internetm easurem ent.In Proceedings ACM IM C,O ctober 2004. [31] Adrian E.Raftery,M artin A.Tanner,and M artin T.W ells,editors. Statistics in the 21st Century (M onographs on Statistics and Applied Probability).Chapm an and Hall/CRC,2001. [32] S.I.Resnick. Heavy tailm odeling and teletra c data. The Annals ofStatistics,25(5):1805{ 1869,1997. [33] Adam J.Slagell,K iran Lakkaraju,and K atherine Luo. Flaim : A m ulti-levelanonym ization fram ework forcom puterand network logs.In LISA,pages63{77,2006. [34] Augustin Soule,K ave Salam atian,and Nina Taft.Com bining ltering and statisticalm ethods foranom aly detection.In Proceedings InternetM easurem entConference,2005. [35] W alterW illingerand Vern Paxson.D iscussion of\Heavy TailM odeling and Teletra c D ata" by S.I.Resnick.http://www.icir.org/vern/papers.htm l,1997. [36] W alter W illinger and Vern Paxson. W here m athem atics m eets the internet. Notices ofthe Am erican M athem aticalSociety,45:961{970,1998. [37] W alter W illinger,M urad S.Taqqu,Robert Sherm an,and D anielV.W ilson. Self-sim ilarity through high-variability: statistical analysis of Ethernet LAN tra c at the source level. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,5:71{86,1997. [38] V.Yegneswaran,P.Barford,and V.Paxson. Using honeynetsforinternetsituationalaware- ness. In Proceedings of the ACM /USENIX Fourth W orkshop on Hot Topics in Networks (Hotnets IV),Sept.2005. [39] V.Yegneswaran,J.G i n,P.Barford,and S.Jha. An architecture forgenerating sem antics- aware signatures.In Proceedings ofUSENIX Security Sym posium ,Sept.2005. [40] Jingm in Zhou,M ark Heckm an,Brennen Reynolds,Adam Carlson,and M attBishop.M odeling network intrusion detection alertsforcorrelation.ACM Trans.Inf.Syst.Secur.,10(1):4,2007. [41] Cli C.Zou,Nick D u eld,D on Towsley,and W eibo G ong. Adaptive defense againstvarious network attacks.In SRUTI’05:Stepsto ReducingUnwanted Tra con theInternetW orkshop, 2005. M ath O pportunitiesin CyberSecurity LBNL-1667E (2009)