arXiv:1103.1552v1 [cs.CR] 8 Mar 2011 1 Pricing and Investments in Internet Security A Cyber-Insurance Perspective Ranjan Pal, Student Member, IEEE, Leana Golubchik, Member, IEEE, Abstract Internet users such as individuals and organizations are subject to different types of epidemic risks such as worms, viruses, spams, and botnets. To reduce the probability of risk, an Internet user generally invests in traditional security mechanisms like anti-virus and anti-spam software, sometimes also known as self-defense mechanisms. However, such software does not completely eliminate risk. Recent works have considered the problem of residual risk elimination by proposing the idea of cyber-insurance. In this regard, an important research problem is the analysis of optimal user self-defense investments and cyber-insurance contracts under the Internet environment. In this paper, we investigate two problems and their relationship: 1) analyzing optimal self-defense investments in the Internet, under optimal cyber-insurance coverage, where optimality is an insurer objective and 2) designing optimal cyber-insurance contracts for Internet users, where a contract is a (premium, coverage) pair. By the term ‘self-defense investment’, we mean the monetary-cum-precautionary cost that each user needs to invest in employing risk mitigating self-defense mechanisms, given that it is optimally insured by Internet insurance agencies. We propose 1) a general mathematical framework by which co-operative and non-co-operative Internet users can decide whether or not to invest in self-defense for ensuring both, individual and social welfare and 2) models to evaluate optimal cyber-insurance contracts in a single cyber-insurer setting. Our results show that co-operation amongst users results in more efﬁcient self-defense investments than those in a non-cooperative setting, under full insurance coverage, in an ideal single insurer cyber-insurance market, whereas in non-ideal single insurer markets of non-cooperative users, partial insurance driven self-defense investments are optimal. We also show the existence of a cyber-insurance market in a single cyber-insurer scenario. Keywords: cyber-insurance, self-defense investments, information asymmetry I. INTRODUCTION The Internet has become a fundamental and an integral part of our daily lives. Billions of people nowadays are using the Internet for various types of applications. However, all these applications are running on a network, that R. Pal and L. Golubchik are with the Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, CA, 90089 USA. e-mail: {rpal, leana}@usc.edu. 2 was built under assumptions, some of which are no longer valid for today’s applications, e,g., that all users on the Internet can be trusted and that there are no malicious elements propagating in the Internet. On the contrary, the infrastructure, the users, and the services offered on the Internet today are all subject to a wide variety of risks. These risks include denial of service attacks, intrusions of various kinds, hacking, phishing, worms, viruses, spams, etc. In order to counter the threats posed by the risks, Internet users1 have traditionally resorted to antivirus and anti-spam softwares, ﬁrewalls, and other add-ons to reduce the likelihood of being affected by threats. In practice, a large industry (companies like Norton, Symantec, McAfee, etc.) as well as considerable research efforts are centered around developing and deploying tools and techniques to detect threats and anomalies in order to protect the Internet infrastructure and its users from the negative impact of the anomalies. In the past one and half decade, protection techniques from a variety of computer science ﬁelds such as cryptography, hardware engineering, and software engineering have continually made improvements. Inspite of such improvements, recent articles by Schneier [28] and Anderson [2][3] have stated that it is impossible to achieve a 100% Internet security protection. The authors attribute this impossibility primarily to four reasons: 1) new viruses, worms, spams, and botnets evolve periodically at a rapid pace and as result it is extremely difﬁcult and expensive to design a security solution that is a panacea for all risks, 2) the Internet is a distributed system, where the system users have divergent security interests and incentives, leading to the problem of ‘misaligned incentives’ amongst users. For example, a rational Internet user might well spend $20 to stop a virus trashing its hard disk, but would hardly have any incentive to invest sufﬁcient amounts in security solutions to prevent a service-denial attack on a wealthy corporation like an Amazon or a Microsoft [32]. Thus, the problem of misaligned incentives can be resolved only if liabilities are assigned to parties (users) that can best manage risk, 3) the risks faced by Internet users are often correlated and interdependent. A user taking protective action in an Internet like distributed system creates positive externalities [14] for other networked users that in turn may discourage them from making appropriate security investments, leading to the ‘free-riding’ problem [6][10][20][22], and 4) network externalities affect the adoption of technology. Katz and Shapiro [12] have analyzed that externalities lead to the classic S-shaped adoption curve, according to which slow early adoption gives way to rapid deployment once the number of users reaches a critical mass. The initial deployment is subject to user beneﬁts exceeding adoption costs, which occurs only if a minimum number of users adopt a technology; so everyone might wait for others to go ﬁrst, and the technology never gets deployed. For example, DNSSEC, and S-BGP are secure protocols that have been developed to better DNS and BGP in terms of security performance. However, the challenge is getting them deployed by providing sufﬁcient internal beneﬁts to adopting ﬁrms. In view of the above mentioned inevitable barriers to 100% risk mitigation, the need arises for alternative 1The term ‘users’ may refer to both, individuals and organizations. 3 methods of risk management in the Internet. Anderson and Moore [3] state that microeconomics, game theory, and psychology will play as vital a role in effective risk management in the modern and future Internet, as did the mathematics of cryptography a quarter century ago. In this regard, cyber-insurance is a psycho-economic-driven risk-management technique, where risks are transferred to a third party, i.e., an insurance company, in return for a fee, i.e., the insurance premium. The concept of cyber-insurance is growing in importance amongst security engineers. The reason for this is three fold: 1) ideally, cyber-insurance increases Internet safety because the insured increases self-defense as a rational response to the reduction in insurance premium [11][13][30][35]. This fact has also been mathematically proven by the authors in [15][18], 2) in the IT industry, the mindset of ‘absolute protection’ is slowly changing with the realization that absolute security is impossible and too expensive to even approach while adequate security is good enough to enable normal functions - the rest of the risk that cannot be mitigated can be transferred to a third party [19], and 3) cyber-insurance will lead to a market solution that will be aligned with economic incentives of cyber-insurers and users (individuals/organizations) - the cyber-insurers will earn proﬁt from appropriately pricing premiums, whereas users will seek to hedge potential losses. In practice, users generally employ a simultaneous combination of retaining, mitigating, and insuring risks [29]. Sufﬁcient evidence exists in daily life (e.g., in the form of auto and health insurance) as well as in the academic literature (speciﬁcally focused on cyber-insurance) [11][13][15][18][30] that insurance-based solutions are useful approaches to pursue, i.e., as a complement to other security measures (e.g., anti-virus software). However, cyber- insurance has not yet become a reality due to a number of unresolved research challenges as well as practical considerations (as detailed below). A number of these challenges are rooted in the differences between cyber- insurance and other forms of insurance. Speciﬁcally, these include: • Networked environment. The operation of systems and applications in a networked environments leads to new insurance challenges. Speciﬁcally, the network’s topology, node connectivity, form of interaction among the nodes, all lead to subsequent risk propagation characteristics. This in turn implies that considerations of interdependent security and correlated risk (among system participants) are signiﬁcantly more complex in an Internet-type environment. All this leads to challenges in modeling of network topologies, risk arrival, attacker models, and so on. • Information asymmetry. Information asymmetry has a signiﬁcant effect on most insurance environments, where typical considerations include inability to distinguish between users of different types as well as users undertaking actions that affect loss probability after the insurance contract is signed. However, there are important aspects of information asymmetry that are particular to cyber-insurance. These include users hiding information from insurers, users lacking information aout networked nodes, as well as insurers lacking information about and not differentiating based on products (e.g., anti-virus software) installed by users. All 4 this leads to challenges in modeling insurers and insured entities. In this paper, we address the problem of pricing and investments in Internet security related to cyber-insurance- driven risk management under a correlated, interdependent, and information asymmetric Internet environment. Our problem is important because 1) for cyber-insurance to be popular amongst Internet users, a market for it should ﬁrst exist, which in turn depends on the prices charged by the cyber-insurer (supply side) to its clients (demand side) and the subsequent proﬁts earned and 2) once a market for cyber-insurance exists, Internet users would want to invest optimally in self-defense investments, given insurance coverage, so as to improve overall security. Optimal user investments is important for two reasons: 1) investing in self-defense mechanisms reduces a user’s probability of facing risk. Given that a user has cyber-insurance coverage, increase in user self-defense investments reduces its premium charged by the cyber-insurer. Thus, its important to characterize the appropriate amounts of investments by a user in self-defense, as well as in cyber-insurance, such that it maximizes its utility and 2) many distributed Internet applications like peer-to-peer ﬁle sharing, multicasting, and network resource sharing encourage co-operation between users to improve overall system performance. In regard to security investments, cooperation invites an opportunity for a user to beneﬁt from the positive externality2 that its investment poses on the other users in the network. However, its not evident that users invest better when they cooperate compared to when they do not, in regard to the network achieving greater overall security. In this paper, we want to study whether security investments are more efﬁcient under cooperation than under non cooperation when it comes to achieving better overall network security. We make the following research contributions in this paper. Before stating them, we emphasize that they are based on the expected utility theory model by von-Neumann and Morgenstern, which is the most widely used theory for analyzing micro-economic models. We also assume in all our models the presence of only one cyber-insurer providing service to its clients (Internet users). 1) We quantitatively analyze an n-agent model, using botnet risks as a representative application, and propose a general mathematical framework through which Internet users can decide 1) whether to invest and 2) how much to invest in self-defense mechanisms, given that each user is optimally insured w.r.t. insurer objectives in perfect single insurer cyber-insurance markets(see Section III). Our framework entails each Internet user to invest optimally in self-defense mechanisms in order to improve overall network security, and is applicable to all risk types that inﬂict direct and/or indirect losses to users. 2) For ideal3 single insurer cyber-insurance markets, we perform a mathematical comparative study to show that cooperation amongst Internet users results in better self-defense investments w.r.t. improving overall 2An externality is a positive (external beneﬁt) or negative(external cost) impact on a user not directly involved in an economic transaction. 3An insurance environment with no information asymmetry between the cyber-insurer and the insured. 5 network security when the risks faced by the users in the Internet are interdependent (see Section IV). We use basic concepts from both, cooperative and non cooperative game theory to support the claims we make in Sections III and IV. Our results are applicable to both, co-operative (e.g., distributed ﬁle sharing) as well as non-cooperative Internet applications, where in both application types a user has the option to be either co-operative or non-cooperative with respect to security parameters. 3) We derive optimal cyber-insurance contracts ((premium, coverage) pairs) between the cyber-insurer and the insured under both, ideal as well as non-ideal cyber-insurance environments, and show that a market for cyber- insurance exists when there is a single cyber-insurer providing insurance to all Internet users (see Section V. While existing literature show that information asymmetries leads to market failure, using mechanism design theory, we design robust cyber-insurance contracts that account for information asymmetries, maximize cyber- insurer proﬁts, and are in market equilibrium. Through our contributions, we jointly address an economics problem of both, the supply side (cyber-insurer) as well as the demand side (cyber-insured) and study the relationship between the two, i.e., we study the effect that prices set in a cyber-insurance contract has on the self-defense investment of an Internet user. For ease of presentation, we ﬁrst address the investment problem of Internet user under a given cyber-insurance contract followed by the problem of pricing optimal cyber-insurance contracts. We do this because cyber-insurers are the ﬁrst movers and account for optimal self-defense investments of Internet users when designing optimal insurance contracts. II. RELATED WORK The ﬁeld of cyber-insurance in networked environments has been triggered by recent results on the amount of indi- vidual user self-defense investments in the presence of network externalities. The authors in [6][10][16][17][20][22] mathematically show that Internet users invest too little in self-defense mechanisms relative to the socially efﬁcient level, due to the presence of network externalities. These works just highlight the role of positive externalities in preventing users for investing optimally in self-defense investments. Thus, the challenge to improving overall network security lies in incentivizing end-users to invest in sufﬁcient amount of self-defense investments inspite of the positive externalities they experience from other users in the network. In response to the challenge, the works in [16][17] modeled network externalities and showed that a tipping phenomenon is possible, i.e., in a situation of low level of self-defense, if a certain fraction of population decides to invest in self-defense mechanisms, it could trigger a large cascade of adoption in security features, thereby strengthening the overall Internet security. However, they did not state how the tipping phenomenon could be realized in practice. In a series of recent works [15][18], Lelarge and Bolot have stated that under conditions of no information asymmetry [1][8] between the insurer and the insured, cyber-insurance incentivizes Internet user investments in self-defense mechanisms, thereby paving the path 6 to trigger a cascade of adoption. They also show that investments in both self-defense mechanisms and insurance schemes are quite inter-related in maintaining a socially efﬁcient level of security on the Internet. Inspite of Lelarge and Bolot proposing the role of cyber-insurance for networked environments in incentivizing increasing user security investments, its common knowledge that the market for cyber-insurance has not blossomed with respect to its promised potential. Most recent works [21][4] have attributed the underdeveloped market for cyber-insurance due to 1. interdependent security, 2. correlated risk, and 3. information asymmetries. Thus, the need of the hour is to develop cyber-insurance solutions simultaneously targeting these three issues and identify other factors that might play an important role in promoting a developed cyber-insurance market. The works in [31][15][18] [7] touch upon the notion of information asymmetry and the effect it has on the insurance parameters, however none of the works explicitly model information asymmetry. In relation to tackling information asymmetry, the authors in [21][7][15] propose the concept of premium differentiation and ﬁnes, but none of the works provide an analytical model to strengthen their point. In addition, no work considers the cooperative and non cooperative nature of network users and the effect this has on the overall level of security and appropriate self-defense investments. III. A MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK FOR SELF-DEFENSE INVESTMENTS In this section, we propose a general mathematical framework for deciding on the appropriate self-defense investment of an Internet user, under optimal cyber-insurance coverage, in ideal single insurer cyber-insurance markets. Here, we assume that Internet users could buy insurance from entities like Internet service providers (ISPs) to cover the risks posed by botnets4. For instance, the coverage could be in the form of money or protection against lost data/reputation. Our framework is applicable to direct/indirect risks, those that are caused by worms, viruses, and botnets. Direct risks result when threats such as worms, viruses, and botnets infect machines (computing device) that lack a security feature, whereas indirect losses result due to the contagion process of one machine getting infected by its neighbors. A. Model Description We consider n identical5 rational risk-averse users in a network, i.e., E(U(w)) < U(E(w)), where w is the wealth possessed by a user. We assume the users to be cooperative to a variable degree, i.e, the network supports Internet applications where users cooperate with other users in some capacity with the intention to improve overall system performance but may or may not cooperate entirely. The users could either voluntarily cooperate by sharing information with other network users regarding self-defense investments, or be bound to cooperate due to a network regulation, which requires participating users to share self-defense investment information. The users may also decide 4Cyber-insurance providers could also be third-party agencies other than ISPs or the government. 5We assume identical users to ensure tractable analyses. 7 not to cooperate at all depending on the nature of applications. Each user has initial wealth w0 and is exposed to a substantial risk of size R with a certain probability p0. (Here, risk represents the negative wealth accumulated by a user when it is affected by Internet threats.) A user investing in self-defense mechanisms reduces its risk probability. For an amount x, invested in self- defense, a user faces a risk probability of p(x), which is a continuous and twice differentiable decreasing function of investment, i.e., p′(x) < 0, p′′(x) > 0, limx→∞p(x) = 0, and limx→∞p′(x) = 0. The investment x is a function of the amount of security software the user buys and the effort it spends on maintaining security settings on its computing device. In addition to investing in self-defense mechanisms, a user either ﬁnds it optimal to buy either full or partial cyber-insurance coverage at a particular premium to eliminate its residual risk. The premium and coverage applicable to users are determined through optimal cyber-insurance contracts that we will investigate in Section V. A user does not buy insurance for high probability low risk events because 1) these events are extremely common and does not cause sufﬁcient damage to demand insurance solutions and 2) the insurance company also has reservations in insuring every kind of risk for proﬁt purposes. We also assume for the moment that there exists markets for cyber-insurance, i.e., cyber-insurance strengthens overall network security and there exists cyber- insurance contracts that are in market equilibrium. We will show in Section V that markets can be made to exist for single-insurer cyber-insurance environments. An Internet user apart from being directly affected by threats may be indirectly infected by the other Internet users. We denote the indirect risk facing probability of a user i as q(−→x −i, n), where −→x −i = (x1, ......, xi−1, xi+1, ...., xn) is the vector of self-defense investments of users other than i. An indirect infection spread is either ‘perfect’ or ‘imperfect’ in nature. In a perfect spread, infection spreads from a user to other users in the network with probability 1, whereas in case of imperfect spread, infection spreads from a user to others with probability less than 1. For a perfect information spread q(−→x −i, n) = 1 −Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj)), whereas in the case of imperfect spread, q(−→x −i, n) < 1 −Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj)). In this paper, we consider perfect spread only, without loss of generality because the probability of getting infected by others in the case of imperfect spread is less than that in the case of perfect spread, and as a result this case is subsumed by the results of the perfect spread case. Under perfect spread, the risk probability of a user i is given as p(xi) + (1 −p(xi))q(−→x −i, n) = 1 − n Y j=1 (1 −p(xj)) (1) and its expected ﬁnal wealth upon facing risk is denoted as w0 −xi −(1−Qn j=1(1−p(xj))·IC)−R +IC, where (1 −Qn j=1(1 −p(xj)) · IC is the premium and IC denotes the insurance coverage6. The aim of a network user is to invest in self-defense mechanisms in such a manner so as to either maximize its expected utility of ﬁnal wealth, 6For full insurance coverage R = IC. 8 or maximize the expected utility of net wealth in the network system, depending on the nature of the application. B. Mathematical Framework for Full Insurance Coverage In this section, we assume full cyber-insurance coverage and propose a general mathematical framework for deciding on the appropriate self-defense investment of an Internet user. It has been proved in [33] that under fair premiums and in ideal insurance environments, a user ﬁnds its optimal to buy full coverage. In other situations, a user might buy full coverage but it might not be optimal for itself as it may end up paying unfair premiums to the insurer, who does not want to make negative proﬁts. Thus, we assume here that full coverage is optimal for users under ideal cyber-insurance environments, given that users would only want to be charged fair premiums. We model the following risk management scenarios: (1) users do not cooperate and do not get infected by other users in the network, (2) users cooperate and may get infected by other users in the network, (3) users do not cooperate but may get infected by other users in the network, and (4) users cooperate but do not get infected by other users in the network. We note that Case 4 is a special case of Case 2 and thus is subsumed in the results of Section III-B2. Scenarios 2 and 3 are realistic in the Internet where risks do spread even though applications may or may not allow co-operation. Scenarios 1 and 4 are idealistic cases and are analyzed for pathological reasons as well as for purposes of comparison with scenarios 2 and 3 w.r.t. optimal self-defense investments. 1) Case 1: No Cooperation, No Infection Spread: Under full insurance, the risk is equal to the insurance coverage, and users determine their optimal amount of self-defense investment by maximizing their level of ﬁnal wealth, which in turn is equivalent to maximizing their expected utility of wealth [9]. We can determine the optimal amount of self-defense investment for each user i by solving for the value of p that maximizes the following constrained optimization problem: argmaxxiFWi(xi) = w0 −xi −p(xi)R −R + IC or argmaxxiFWi(xi) = w0 −xi −p(xi)R subject to 0 ≤p(xi) ≤p0, where FWi is the ﬁnal wealth of user i and p(xi)R is the premium for full insurance coverage. Taking the ﬁrst and second derivatives of FWi with respect to xi, we obtain FW ′ i(xi) = −1 −p′(xi)R (2) 9 and FW ′′ i (xi) = −p′′(xi)R < 0 (3) Thus, our objective function is globally concave. Let xopt i be the optimal xi obtained by equating the ﬁrst derivative to 0. Thus, we have: p′(xopt i )R = −1. (4) Economic Interpretation: The left hand side (LHS) of Equation (4) is the marginal beneﬁt of investing an additional dollar in self-protection mechanisms, whereas the right hand side (RHS) denotes the marginal cost of the investment. A user equates the LHS with the RHS to determine its self-defense investment. Conditions for Investment: We ﬁrst investigate the boundary costs. The user will not consider investing in self- defense if p′(0)R ≥−1 because its marginal cost of investing in any defense mechanism, i.e., -1, will be relatively equal to or lower than the marginal beneﬁt when no investment occurs. In this case, xopt i = 0. If the user invests such that it has no exposure to risk, xopt i = ∞. When p′(0)R < −1, the costs do not lie on the boundary, i.e., 0 < xopt i < ∞, and the user invests to partially eliminate risk (see Equation (4)). 2) Case 2: Cooperation, Infection Spread: Under full insurance coverage, user i’s expected ﬁnal wealth is given by FWi = FW(xi, −→x −i) = w0 −xi −(1 − n Y j=1 (1 −p(xj)))R (5) When Internet users co-operate, they jointly determine their optimal self-defense investments. We assume that co- operation and bargaining costs are nil. In such a case, according to Coase theorem [26], the optimal investments for users are determined by solving for the socially optimal investment values that maximize the aggregate ﬁnal wealth (AFW) of all users. Thus, we have the following constrained optimization problem: argmaxxi,− → x −iAFW = nw0 − n X i=1 xi −n(1 − n Y j=1 (1 −p(xj)))R 0 ≤pi(xi) ≤p0, ∀i Taking the ﬁrst and the second partial derivatives of the aggregate ﬁnal wealth with respect to xi, we obtain ∂ ∂xi (AFW) = −1 −np′(xi) n Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xj))R (6) and ∂2 ∂x2 i (AFW) = −np′′(xi) n Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xj))R < 0 (7) 10 The objective function is globally concave, which implies the existence of a unique solution xopt i (−→x −i), for each −→x −i. Our maximization problem is symmetric for all i, and thus the optimal solution is given by xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) = xopt j ( −−→ xopt −j ) for all j = 2, ...., n. We obtain the optimal solution by equating the ﬁrst derivative to zero, which gives us the following equation np′(xopt i (−→x −i)) Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xi))R = −1 (8) Economic Interpretation: The left hand side (LHS) of Equation (8) is the marginal beneﬁt of investing in self- defense. The right hand side (RHS) of Equation (8) is the marginal cost of investing in self-defense, i.e., -1. We obtain the former term of the marginal beneﬁt by internalizing the positive externality7, i.e., by accounting for the self-defense investments of other users in the network. The external well-being posed to other users by user i when it invests an additional dollar in self-defense is −p′(xi) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xi)). This is the amount by which the likelihood of each of the other users getting infected is reduced, when user i invests an additional dollar. Conditions for Investment: If np′(0) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R ≥−1, it is not optimal to invest any amount in self- defense because the marginal cost of investing in defense mechanisms is relatively equal to or less than the marginal beneﬁt of the joint reduction in risks to individuals when no investment occurs. In this case, the optimal value is a boundary investment, i.e., xopt i (−→x −i) = 0. If the user invests such that it has no exposure to risk, xopt i = ∞. In cases where np′(0) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R < −1, the optimal probabilities do not lie on the boundary and the user invests to partially eliminate risk (see Equation (8)). 3) Case 3: No Cooperation, Infection Spread: We assume that users do not co-operate with each other on the level of investment, i.e., users are selﬁsh. In such a case, the optimal level of self-defense investment is the pure strategy Nash equilibria of the normal form game, G = (N, A, ui(s)), played by the users [5]. The game consists of two players, i.e., |N| = n; the action set of G is A = Qn i=1 ×Ai, where Ai ǫ [0, ∞], and the utility/payoff function ui(s) for each player i is their individual ﬁnal wealth, where s ǫ Qn i=1 ×Ai. The pure strategy Nash equilibria of a normal form game is the intersection of the best response functions of each user [5]. We deﬁne the best response function of user i, xbest i (−→x −i), as xbest i (−→x −i) ǫ argmaxxiFWi(xi, −→x −i), where FWi(xi, −→x −i) = w0 −xi −(1 − n Y j=1 (1 −p(xj)))R (9) 7Internalizing a positive externality refers to rewarding a user, who contributes positively and without compensation, to the well-being of other users, through its actions. 11 Taking the ﬁrst and second partial derivative of FWi(xi, −→x −i)with respect to xi and equating it to zero, we obtain ∂ ∂xi (FWi(xi, −→x −i)) = −1 −p′(xi) n Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xj))R (10) and ∂2 ∂x2 i (FWi(xi, −→x −i)) = −p′′(xi) n Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xj))R < 0 (11) Thus, our objective function is globally concave, which implies a unique solution xbest i (−→x −i) for each −→x −i. We also observe that a particular user i’s strategy complements user j’s strategy for all j, which implies that only symmetric pure strategy Nash equilibria exist. The optimal investment for user i is determined by the following equation: ∂ ∂xi (FWi(xi, −→x −i)) = −1 −p′(xi) n Y j=1,j̸=i (1 −p(xj))R = 0 (12) Economic Interpretation: The left hand side (LHS) of Equation (12) is the marginal beneﬁt of investing in self- defense. The right hand side (RHS) of Equation (12) is the marginal cost of investing in self-defense, i.e., -1. Since the users cannot co-operate on the level of investment in self-defense mechanisms, it is not possible for them to beneﬁt from the positive externality that their investments pose to each other. Conditions for Investment: If p′(0) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R ≥−1, it is not optimal to invest any amount in self- defense because the marginal cost of investing in defense mechanisms is greater than the marginal beneﬁt of the joint reduction in risks to individuals when no investment occurs. In this case, the optimal value is a boundary investment, i.e., xbest i (−→x −i) = 0. If the user invests such that it has no exposure to risk, xopt i = ∞. In cases where p′(0) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R < −1, the optimal probabilities do not lie on the boundary and the user invests to partially eliminate risk (see Equation (12)). Multiplicity of Nash Equilibria: Due to the symmetry of our pure strategy Nash equilibria and the increasing nature of the best response functions, there always exists an odd number of pure-strategy Nash equilibria, i.e., xbest i (−→x best −i ) = xbest j (−→x best −j ) for all j = 2, . . . , n. C. Optimal Investments Under Partial Insurance Coverage In this section, we analyze the situation of optimal self-defense investments when the cyber-insurance agency ﬁnds it optimal to provide partial coverage to its clients. This situation arises mainly due to conditions of information asymmetry in the insurance environment, when partial coverage is necessary to ensure a market for cyber-insurance (see Section V). We only assume the realistic case of information asymmetry arising in a non-cooperative Internet environment as co-operative Internet users would want social welfare and would not generally want to hide relevant 12 details from the cyber-insurer. 1) Case A: No Co-operation, No Infection Spread: Under partial insurance, users determine their optimal amount of self-defense investment by maximizing their expected utility of ﬁnal wealth, which is not equivalent to maximizing the expected ﬁnal wealth [9]. Thus, we have to perform our analysis based on utility functions rather than based on the expected value of ﬁnal wealth. Let U() be an increasing and concave utility function for each user in the network such that U ′ > 0 and U ′′ < 0. We can determine the optimal amount of self-defense investment for each user i by solving for the value of pi that maximizes the following constrained optimization problem: argmaxpiUFW(pi) = U(w0 −x(p0 −pi) −pi · (R −D)) 0 ≤pi ≤p0, where UFW is the utility of ﬁnal wealth of a user, x(∆p), a function of the difference of p0 and pi, represents user i’s cost of reducing the risk probability from p0 to pi, ∆p = p0 −pi, and 0 < D < R is the deductible in cyber-insurance. We assume that x is monotonically increasing and twice differentiable with x(0) = 0, x′(0) > 0, and x′′(0) > 0, and pi · (R −D) is the actuarially fair premium for user i’s partial insurance coverage. 2) Case B: No Co-operation, Infection Spread: Under conditions of infection spread in a non-cooperative Internet environment, user i’s expected utility of ﬁnal wealth when a deductible of D is imposed on itself is given as UFWi = UFWi(pi, p−i, D) = α + β, (13) where α = n Y i=1 (1 −pi)U(w0 −x(∆pi) −P(D)) (14) and β = 1 − n Y j=1 (1 −pj)U(w0 −x(p0 −pi) −P(D) −D) (15) We deﬁne P(D) as the actuarially fair premium, and it is expressed as P(D) = 1 − n Y j=1 (1 −pj)(R −D) (16) Since there is spread of infection and that the Internet environment is non co-operative, we have a non co-operative game of self-defense investments between the Internet users. We denote the best response of user i under a deductible 13 as the solution to the following constrained optimization problem: pbestD i (p−i, D) ǫ argmaxpiUFW(pi, p−i) 0 ≤pi ≤1, ∀i The intersection of the best responses of the users form the set of Nash equilibria of the investment game. IV. COMPARATIVE STUDY In this section, we compare the optimal level of investments under full cyber-insurance coverage in the context of various cases discussed in the previous section. We emphasize here that greater the self-defense investments made by a user, better it is for the security of the whole network. Our results are applicable to Internet applications where a user has the option to be either co-operative or non-cooperative with respect to security parameters. A. Case 3 versus Case 1 The following lemma gives the result of comparing Case 3 and Case 1. Lemma 1. If Internet users do not co-operate on their self-defense investments (i.e., do not account for the positive externality posed by other Internet users), in any Nash equilibrium in Case 3, the users inefﬁciently under- invest in self-defense as compared to the case where users do not cooperate and there is no infection spread. Proof. In Case 1, the condition for any user i not investing in any self-defense is −p′(0)R ≤1. The condition implies that −1 −p′(0) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R < 0 for all −→x −i. The latter expression is the condition for non- investment in Case 3. Thus, for all users i, xopt i = 0 in Case 1 implies xbest i = 0 in Case 3, i.e., xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) = xbest i ( −−→ xbest −i ) = 0, ∀i. The condition for optimal investment of user i in Case 1 is −1 −p′(xi)R = 0. Hence, −1 −p′(xi) Qn j=1,j̸=i(1 −p(xj))R < 0, for all x−i. Thus, in situations of self-investment for user i, xopt i > 0 in Case 1 implies 0 ≤xbest i < xopt i , for all x−i, in Case 3, i.e., xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) > xbest i ( −−→ xbest −i ) ≥0, ∀i. Therefore, under non-cooperative settings, a user always under-invests in self-defense mechanisms. ■ B. Case 3 versus Case 2 The following lemma gives the result of comparing Case 3 and Case 2. Lemma 2. Under environments of infection spread, an Internet user co-operating with other users on its self- defense investment (i.e., accounts for the positive externality posed by other Internet users), always invests at least as much as in the case when it does not co-operate. Proof. In Case 2, the condition for any user i not investing in any self-defense mechanism is −1 −np′(0)(1 − p(0))n−1R ≤0. The condition also implies that −1 −np′(0)(1 −p(0))n−1R ≤0. The latter expression is the 14 condition in Case 3 for an Internet user not investing in any self-defense mechanism. Thus, for all users i, xopt i = 0 in Case 2 implies xbest i = 0, for all Nash equilibrium in Case 3, i.e., xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) = xbest i ( −−→ xbest −i ) = 0, ∀i. The condition for optimal investment of each user i in Case 2 is −1 −np′(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i )(1 −p(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ))n−1R = 0. The latter expression implies −1 −p′(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i )(1 −p(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ))n−1R < 0. Hence xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) > xbest i ( −−→ xbest −i ) ≥0, ∀i. Therefore, under environments of infection spread, a user in Case 3 always under invests in self-defense mechanisms when compared to a user in Case 2. ■ C. Case 2 versus Case 1 The following lemma gives the result of comparing Case 2 and Case 1. Lemma 3. In any n-agent cyber-insurance model, where p(0) < 1− n−1q 1 n, it is always better for Internet users to invest more in self-defense in a co-operative setting with infection spread than in a non-co-operative setting with no infection spread. Proof. In Case 1, the condition for any user i not investing in any self-defense is −p′(0)R ≤1. The condition implies that −1 −np′(0)(1 −p(0))n−1R ≤0 for all p0 < 1 − n−1q 1 n. Thus, for all i, xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) = 0 in Case 1 implies xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) ≥0 in Case 3 if and only if p0 < 1 − n−1q 1 n. In situations of non-zero investment −1 −np′(xi(−→x −i))(1 −p(xi(−→x −i))n−1)R > −1 −p′(xi(−→x −i)), ∀i, ∀xi(−→x −i), if and only if p(xi(−→x −i)) < 1 − n−1q 1 n. Hence, −1 −np′(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i )(1 −p(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ))n−1)R > −1 −p′(xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i )), ∀i, where xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) is the optimal investment in Case 2. Since the expected ﬁnal wealth of a user in Case 1 is concave in xi(−→x −i), xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) in Case 2 is greater than xopt i ( −−→ xopt −i ) in Case 1. Thus, we infer that investments made by users in Case 2 are always greater than those made by users in Case 1 when the risk probability is less than a threshold value that decreases with increase in the number of Internet users. Hence, in the limit as the number of users tends towards inﬁnity, the lemma holds for all p0. ■ The basic intuition behind the results in the above three lemmas is that internalizing the positive effects on other Internet users leads to better and appropriate self-defense investments for users. We also emphasize that our result trends hold true in case of heterogenous network users because irrespective of the type of users, co-operating on investments always leads to users accounting for the positive externality and investing more efﬁciently. The only difference in case of heterogenous network user scenarios could be the value of probability thresholds i.e., p(0) (this value would be different for each user in the network), under which the above lemmas hold. Based on the above three lemmas, we have the following theorem. 15 Theorem 1. If Internet users cannot contract on the externalities, in any Nash equilibrium, Internet users inefﬁciently under-invest in self-defense, that is compared to the socially optimal level of investment in self-defense. In addition, in any Nash equilibrium, a user invests less in self-defense than if they did not face the externality. Furthermore, if p(0) < 1 − n−1q 1 n, the socially optimal level of investment in self-defense is higher compared to the level if Internet users did not face the externality. Proof. The proof follows directly from the results in Lemmas 1, 2, and 3. ■ The theorem implies that when negotiations could be carried out by a regulator (ex., an ISP) amongst Internet users in a cooperative setting, inevitable network externalities could be internalized and as a result users who beneﬁt from the externality would be required to invest considerably in self-defense investments, thereby improving overall network security. The negotiations cannot not be conducted in a non-cooperative setting and as a result users would not pay for the beneﬁts obtained from the positive externalities, thereby investing suboptimally. V. OPTIMAL CYBER-INSURANCE CONTRACTS In this section, we discuss the problem of optimal insurance contracts. We make two contributions in this section: 1) we derive optimal cyber-insurance contracts under ideal insurance environments when no information asymmetry exists between the cyber-insurer and the insured and 2) we derive optimal cyber-insurance contracts under information asymmetry environments and show that a market exists for monopolistic insurance scenarios. Once optimal contracts are set by the cyber-insurance agencies, Internet users decide on their optimal self-defense investments given the optimal contracts. A. Optimal Cyber-Insurance Contracts Under No Information Asymmetry The main goal of this section is to derive optimal cyber-insurance contracts between the insurer and its clients under conditions of no information asymmetry (for perfect insurance markets), where the insurer could have either a social welfare maximizing mindset or a proﬁt maximizing mindset. When an insurer has a social welfare mindset, it does not care that much about making business proﬁts as it does about insuring people so as to increase the population of users investing in self-defense mechanisms. Its hard to think of any commercial organization in the modern world who would want to provide service without thinking of proﬁts. However, if ISPs would be a cyber- insurance agency, it would want to secure itself, being a computing and networking entity. Given that an ISP is an eyeball and the sink for many end-user ﬂows, it would have a strong reason to ensure high security amongst its clients as a primary objective, in order to strengthen its own security. 1) Model: We assume that Internet users are uniformly distributed on the line segment [0,1], i.e., the location p ǫ [0, 1] of a particular user on the unit interval denotes its probability of facing a substantial risk of size R. This is the risk a user faces after some initial investments, which are precautionary efforts both in the monetary, as well 16 as in the non-monetary sense. We assume that the ISP (or any other insurance agency) could have an estimate of this risk probability via the answers to some general questions (e.g., the type of anti-virus protection one uses, the security mindset of a user, and some basic general knowledge of Internet security) it requires its potential clients to answer before signing up for service, and from the network topology. The network topology gives information about the node degrees, which in turn helps determine the probability of each user being affected by threats. Apart from the probability of facing risk, the Internet users are assumed to be homogenous in terms of their initial wealth w and the size R of risk faced, where a risk represents the negative wealth accumulated by a user when it is affected by Internet threats. We assume that the potential risk faced by an Internet user is less than its initial wealth w. Each user may buy at most one cyber-insurance policy from the insurer by agreeing to pay a premium z for an insurance coverage amount c. The cyber-insurance company advertises only one contract to all its customers. We assume that the level of coverage is not bigger than size R of risk. We also assume that the initial wealth of a user, the size of risk, the cyber-insurance premium, and the level of coverage have the same measurable units. We also account for the fact that the system does not face the information asymmetry problem. We apply a risk-averse utility function Up(z, c) to Internet users, where Up(z, c) is deﬁned as Up(z, c) =    w −pKR if it buys no insurance w −z −pK(R −c) if it buys insurance, where K ≥1 is the degree8 of risk aversion of a user, assumed to be the same for all users in the network. When K = 1, a user evaluates its loss to be exactly R. When K > 1, the user adds an additional negative utility of (K −1)R for an idiosyncratic pain due to facing the risk. We assume that the cyber-insurance agency is risk-neutral, i.e., it is only concerned with its expected proﬁts. For an insurance policy (z, c) sold to a user, the contract is worth (1 −p)z + p(z −c) = z −pc (17) to the insurer. Thus, the overall expected proﬁt made by the cyber-insurance agency by providing the same insurance service to its entire geographical locality is G(z, c) = Z 1 0 (z −pc)dp (18) Here, we use ‘contract’ and ‘policy’ interchangeably. 2) Welfare Maximizing Insurance: We now determine an optimal cyber-insurance policy, (z, c), a cyber-insurance agency interested in maximizing social welfare would provide to its customers. We assume here that the insurer 8The degree of risk aversion mentioned in this paper could be any standard risk aversion measure such as the Arrow-Pratt risk aversion measure [33]. 17 values the welfare of each of its customers equally and is not inclined to making negative proﬁt. We also assume that a user can decide whether to buy the policy or not, and that the insurer also has the power to decide whether to provide insurance to a customer, based on its probability of facing risk. Problem Formulation. Let the insurer offer a contract (z, c). An Internet user facing a probability of risk, p, will want to buy cyber-insurance if Up(z, c) ≥Up(0, 0). Thus, the following condition must hold for a user to buy cyber-insurance w −z −pK(R −c) ≥w −pKR (19) or, p ≥ z Kc = pL(z, c) (20) Therefore, a user buys insurance only if its risk probability is higher than some lower bound pL. The lower bound is dependent on z, c, and K. We observe that for a ﬁxed K, the lower the value of premium per unit coverage, the higher is the incentive for a user to buy cyber-insurance. On the other hand, the cyber-insurance agency may not allow every interested user to buy insurance. There exists a particular value, pH, of the probability of risk, for which z = pHc. In such a case, the cyber-insurance company breaks even and the resulting z is the fair premium. The insurance agency denies insurance service to users whose probability of risk is greater than pH. Thus, pH is the upper bound of the risk probability that a user requiring insurance can afford if it wants to claim insurance. A cyber-insurer primarily interested in social welfare advertises a contract (z, c) that maximizes the total welfare of all Internet users in its geographical locality without it making negative proﬁts. Formally, we frame our optimization problem as follows. argmax(z,c)TW = A + B + C subject to D, where A = Z pH pL [w −z −pK(R −c)]dp, B = Z pL 0 (w −pKR)dp, C = Z 1 pH (w −pKR)dp, 18 D = Z pH pL (z −pc)dp ≥0 A is the expected utility of all Internet users whose risk facing probability, p, lies in the interval [pL, pH]. B represents the expected utility of users who have no incentive to buy insurance. The risk probability of these users lies in the interval [0, pL]. C stands for the expected utility of users who want to purchase cyber-insurance, but are denied by the insurance agency. Their risk probabilities lie in the interval [pH, 1]. Finally, D represents the constraint of the optimization problem, which states that the expected proﬁts of the cyber-insurer are non-negative. Results. We state our results through a theorem. We note that the terms ‘proﬁts’ and ‘total user welfare’ refer to the expected values of proﬁts and social welfare. Theorem 2. For a welfare-maximizing cyber-insurance contract, the optimal (premium, coverage) pair is (R,R); the risk probability lower bound, pL, equals 1 K ; pH = 1; total user welfare, TW, is (w −R 2K−1 2K ); and the insurer proﬁt, P, equals R (K−1)2 2K2 . Proof. We ﬁrst express the risk probability bounds, pL and pH, as functions of z, K, and c. In terms of z, K, and c, pL is equal to z Kc and pH equals z c. Integrating the left hand side of constraint D in our optimization problem, we obtain the cyber-insurer proﬁts as c 2 z2 c2 (K−1)2 K2 . Since the proﬁts are always positive, the constraint D is not binding on the optimization problem. Thus, our constrained optimization problem turns into the following unconstrained one. argmax(z,c)P −Q + T −S, where P = (R −cz c )(K −1 K ), Q = 1 2(R −c)z2 c2 (K2 −1 K ), T = w(1 −z c + z Kc), and S = 1 2KR(1 −z2 c2 + z2 c2 · K2 ) The ﬁrst partial derivative of the objective function with respect to c evaluates to z2 c2 , which is a strictly non- negative quantity. Thus, the optimal value of the objective function lies at the maximum value c can assume, i.e., R. Substituting the optimal c in the objective function, we obtain a new unconstrained optimization problem of a single variable as follows. argmaxzX −Y −Z, 19 where X = (w −Rz c )z c (K −1 K ), Y = w K (K −z c (K −1)), and Z = R 2K (K2 −(z2 c2 )(K2 −1)) The ﬁrst derivative of the objective function evaluates to R z c (K−1)2 K , which is a strictly non-negative quantity. Therefore, the optimal value of the objective function lies at z = R, since any premium greater than R is unfair to an insurance customer and would reduce social welfare. Using substitution, the optimal (premium, coverage) pair, (R, R), leads to a pL value of 1 K , TW value of (w −R 2K−1 2K ), and an insurer proﬁt, P, equal to R (K−1)2 2K2 . ■ Theorem Implications: We infer that the optimal insurance coverage in a welfare maximizing scenario is ‘full coverage’. For K = 1 the lower bound of risk facing probability, pL, is 1, and a user buys full cyber-insurance if it is sure to face a risk, and in this case the insurer charges its client a fair premium R, i.e., probability of facing risk × coverage (R) = R = premium charged. However, as the degree of risk averseness of a user increases, the value of pL is less than one, and a user decides to buy insurance for risks that occur with probability less than or equal to 1. Intuitively, this result makes sense as more risk averse users are more inclined to buy cyber-insurance even for risks that do not occur with probability (w.p) 1. However, for K > 1, the insurer charges an unfair premium R, i.e., probability of facing risk × coverage (R) < R = premium charged, to users who face risks that occur w.p < 1, and charges a fair premium to users who are sure to face risk. Thus, the cyber-insurance agency de-incentivizes higher risk-averse users to buy insurance when they do not face risk for sure, to prevent itself from making negative proﬁts. The proﬁts made by the insurance company also increase with increase in K, and this is true as more users buy cyber-insurance, i.e, pL value decreases with increase in K. However, the total user welfare decreases with increase in its degree of risk averseness. This is due to the fact that our utility function for each user is wealth based and a user loses more of its initial wealth with increase in its risk averseness. We emphasize here that the total user welfare is calculated by implicitly taking into account initial precautionary investments of a user. After a contract is signed between the cyber-insurer and its client, a user can decide on its optimal self-defense investments and evaluate a different utility function for welfare [23]. B. Proﬁt Maximizing Insurance In this section, we determine the optimal cyber-insurance policy, (z, c), a cyber-insurance agency solely interested in maximizing proﬁts (a monopolist) would provide to its customers. Similar to Section V-A2, we assume that a user can decide whether to buy the policy or not, and that the insurer also has the power to decide whether to 20 provide insurance to a customer based on its probability of facing risk. Problem Formulation. A cyber-insurer primarily interested in making business proﬁts chooses a contract (z, c) that maximizes its total proﬁt over all users it services. Formally, we frame our unconstrained optimization problem as follows. argmax(z,c) Z pH pL (z −pc)dp, subject to A + B + C ≥0, where A = Z pH pL [w −z −pK(R −c)]dp, B = Z pL 0 (w −pKR)dp, C = Z 1 pH (w −pKR)dp, where pL and pH are deﬁned as above. Results. We state our result through the following theorem. Theorem 3. For a proﬁt-maximizing insurance contract, the optimal (premium, coverage) pair is (R K2 2K−1, R); pL = K 2K−1; pH = 1; and the insurer proﬁt, P, equals R (K−1)2 2(2K−1). Proof. Evaluating the integrand in the objective function, we determine the expression for overall proﬁt as P = c[z c [min{z c , 1} −z cK ] −1 2[({minz c , 1})2 −( z2 c2K2 )]] We observe that the expression is increasing in c. Thus, the cyber-insurer maximizes its proﬁt by setting c equal to R. When the premium per unit of coverage is less than 1, the expected overall proﬁt is cz2 c2 (K−1)2 2K2 , which is increasing in z c. The increase in total proﬁt is due to (i) increase in sales, which arises due to the increase in the range of insured individuals, i.e., the difference in the range is pH −pL = z c − z Kc = z c K−1 K , which increases with increasing premium per unit of coverage, z c, and (ii) the mean risk probability also increasing with the premium per unit of coverage, i.e., R pH pL pdp = z2 c2 K2−1 2K2 , which increases with z c. When the premium per unit of coverage is greater than 1 and c = R, the optimal premium is determined by equating the partial ﬁrst derivative of P to 0, i.e., ∂P ∂(P P UC) = z K2 [K2 −z c(2K −1)] = 0, which results in a premium z equal to R K2 2K−1, where PPUC is the premium per unit of coverage. The insurer proﬁts when PPUC is less than 1 is R (K−1)2 2K2 , and equals R (K−1)2 2(2K−1) when PPUC ≥1. Since K2 > 2K −1 for all K ǫ R, the cyber-insurer proﬁts are maximized for PPUC ≥1. Substituting the values of z and c, we get the lower bound of risk probability as K 2K−1. ■ 21 Theorem Implications: We observe that full insurance coverage is the optimal insurance coverage in case of a proﬁt maximizing scenario. Apart from the case when K = 1, in all other cases of K, the insurer charges an unfair premium to its client for a reason similar to that mentioned in the implications of Theorem 2. Taking the limit as K tends to inﬁnity, we infer that the the probability lower bound, pL, for a user lies in the interval [0.5, 1]. The value of pH is obtained from the equation R K2 2K−1 = pHR. As for insurer proﬁts and individual user welfare, they increase and decrease with K for reasons similar to those provided in the implications of Theorem 2. We also observe that for K = 1, the monopolistic cyber-insurer makes zero proﬁts. This result in in accordance with the result shown by the authors in [15] in the context of monopolistic insurance. C. Comparison Study We now draw a comparison between parameters we have evaluated in both, welfare-maximizing as well as monopolistic contracts. From the results in Sections V-A2 and V-B, we observe that the optimal premium charged by the cyber-insurers is more in the case of monopolistic insurers than in the case of social welfare-maximizing insurers, which is intuitive. For Internet users who are sure to face a risk, the monopolistic insurer charges them an unfair premium for coverage, i.e., premium > coverage (except when K = 1), whereas for welfare-maximizing insurers, the users who are sure to face risk are charged a fair premium as insurer is not proﬁt maximizing. We also observe that the proﬁts made by a monopolistic insurer are higher than its welfare-maximizing counterpart, which is also intuitive. The total user welfare in the proﬁt-maximizing scenario is w −R K2(3K−2) 2(2K−1)2 . To compare the total user welfare in a proﬁt-maximizing scenario with that of a welfare-maximizing scenario, we need to compare the expressions, K2(3K−2) (2K−1)2 and 2K−1 K . Clearly, the former expression is greater or equal to the the latter for all K ≥1, equality holding when K = 1. Therefore, the total user welfare in the case of a welfare-maximizing contract is always greater than or equal to that of a proﬁt-maximizing cyber-insurance contract, equality holding when K = 1. The welfare gap for general values of K is R 2 · [K2(3K−2) (2K−1)2 −2K−1 K ], which is linear with K - the degree of user risk averseness. D. Optimal Cyber-Insurance Contracts Under Information Asymmetry Scenarios In this section, we model realistic, i.e., imperfect, single insurer cyber-insurance markets and address two informational asymmetry problems arising between the cyber-insurer and the insured, viz., adverse selection and moral hazard. In adverse selection, the insurer does not know about the risk category of the user it is insuring, i.e., it does not have knowledge about whether the user is a high risk user or a low risk-user. Moral hazard results in a situation where a user behaves recklessly after being insured, knowing the fact that it would be covered. A cyber-insurance agency is most likely to make losses if it does not properly account for information asymmetry in 22 its insurance contract. In this section, we design optimal cyber-insurance contracts under information asymmetry. Our analysis is suitable to scenarios of non-cooperation amongst Internet users, as we ﬁrmly believe that it is quite unlikely that users would be cooperative in regard to ensuring social welfare and at the same time behave recklessly themselves. 1) Model: We assume two classes of users, one which has a high chance of facing risks and the other which has a low chance. We term these classes as ‘LC’ and ‘HC’ respectively. Let θ(1 −θ) be the proportion of users who run a high chance(low chance) of facing risk of size R respectively. However, on grounds of adverse selection the insurer cannot observe the class of any user. We consider two cases relevant to adverse selection in the Internet: 1) the insurer as well as the insured user have no knowledge about which risk class the user falls in9 and 2) the insurer has no knowledge of a user’s risk class but the user acquires this knowledge (through third-party agencies) after signing the contract but before it invests in self-defense investments. We assume that each user in class i ǫ {LC, HC} invests an amount xi in self-defense mechanisms after signing an insurance contract, which reduces its probability pi of being affected by Internet threats. We list the following mathematical properties related to our risk facing probability function p, for users in classes LC and HC. • p(x) is a twice continuously differentiable decreasing function with 0 > p′ LC(x) > p′ HC(x) and p′′ i (xi) > 0, i.e., investments by users in class LC are more effective in reducing the loss probability than equivalent investments by users in class HC. • pHC(x) > pLC(x). • 1 > pHC(x) ≥pLC(x) > 0, ∀x ǫ [0, ∞). We model moral hazard by assuming that the cyber-insurer cannot observe or have knowledge about the amount of investments made by the insured. Regarding user investments, apart from the self-defense investments made by a user, we assume a certain minimum amount of base investments of value binv made by an Internet user of class i prior to signing insurance contracts, without which no user can be insured. Thus pi(binv) is the highest chance of risk a user of class i may face. The insurance company accounts for adverse selection and moral hazard and designs an insurance contracts of the form C = (z, c), for users in class j ǫ {LC, HC}, where z is the premium and c is the net coverage for users. An Internet user adopts the insurance contract and invests in self-defense mechanisms to achieve maximum beneﬁt. We measure the beneﬁt of users of a particular risk class i as a utility, which is expressed as a function of contract Ck and self-defense investments xi. We deﬁne the utility function for a users in risk class i and facing a risk of 9This situation may generally happen when the users do not provide truthful information to insurance agency questionnaires and the insurer cannot estimate the value of correlated and interdependent risks posed to users. 23 value R as an expected utility of ﬁnal wealth, and it is expressed as EUi(Ck, xi) = pi(xi)u(w0 −R + ck) + (1 −pi(xi))u(w0 −zk), (21) where w0 is the initial wealth of user i and xi is the amount of self-defense investment it makes and u() is a increasing continuously differentiable function (u′(xi) > 0, u′′(xi) < 0) that denotes the utility of wealth. Differentiating Equation 17 w.r.t. xi, we get the ﬁrst order condition as −p′ i(xi)[u(w0 −zk) −u(w0 −R + ck)] = 0 (22) The ﬁrst order condition generates the optimal self-defense investment for user i that maximizes its expected utility of ﬁnal wealth. In the following sections we analyze optimal cyber-insurance contracts under the presence of moral hazard when 1) neither the insurer nor the insured has any information regarding the risk class of a user and 2) the insurer does not have information regarding user class but the insured acquires information after signing the contract but before making self-defense investments. E. Neither the Insurer Nor the Insured Has Information An Internet user does not know its risk class and therefore it maximizes its expected utility of ﬁnal wealth by setting its probability of loss equal to an expected probability value of pα(x) = θpHC(x) + (1 −θ)pLC(x) and solving Equation 22. We assume that the values of pLC(x) and pHC(x) are common knowledge to the insurer and the insured. The cyber-insurer on the other hand, maximizes its proﬁts by offering a contract Cα∗= (zα∗, cα∗). The optimization problem related to an insurer’s proﬁt is given as argmaxzα,cα,λα,ρα,ρ0qα[1 −pα(xα)zα −pα(xα)cα] subject to Uα(Cα∗, xα∗) −Uα(0, x0) ≥0, (23) −p′ α(xα)[u(w0 −zα) −u(w0 −R + cα)] = 0, (24) −p′ α(x0)[u(w0) −u(w0 −R)] = 0, (25) where qα is the number of cyber-insurance contracts sold by the insurer and x0 is the amount of self-defense investments when no insurance is purchased. λα, ρα, ρ0 are the Lagrangian multipliers related to constraints 23, 24 24, and 25 respectively. α could be considered as the risk class that each user feels its in, as it does not have perfect information about whether its in class LC or HC. Constraint 23 is the participation constraint (Individual Rationality) stating that the expected utility of ﬁnal wealth of a user is atleast as much with cyber-insurance as without cyber-insurance. Constraints 24 and 25 state that Internet users will invest in optimal self-defense investments so as to maximize their utility of ﬁnal wealth, and this is in exact accordance to what the cyber-insurer wants (i.e., to avoid moral hazard). On route to solving our optimization problem, we derive the Lagrangian [27] and ﬁrst order conditions, but omit it in the paper due to lack of space. Our main aim to solve the optimization problem is to only ﬁnd whether the solution entails full insurance coverage or partial insurance coverage. The optimization problem presented in this section10 is an example of a general principal-agent problem. The Internet users (agents) will act non-cooperatively as utility maximizers, whereas the principal’s problem is to design a mechanism that maximizes its utility by accounting for adverse selection and moral hazard on the client (agent) side. Thus, the situation represents a Bayesian game of incomplete information [5]. According to Palfrey and Srivastava [25], there exists an incentive-compatible direct revelation mechanism [34] for the problem implementable in private value models, where users do what the insurer desires (i.e., invest optimally in self-defense investments), provided the constraints in the optimization problem bind, and the users do not use weakly dominated strategies [5] in equilibrium. Result and Intuition: The solution to the optimization problem in the binding case tends to full insurance coverage as the utility function tends to become increasingly risk averse, and partial insurance coverage otherwise. It also generates a pooling equilibrium contract11, which is unique and entails partial cyber-insurance coverage at fair premiums. Thus, we infer that a partial insurance coverage is optimal for the cyber-insurer to provide to its clients as it accounts for the uncertainty of user risk types. Intuitively, a pooling equilibrium works as neither the insurer nor the insured has any information on user risk type and as a result the cyber-insurer is not at a disadvantage regarding gaining risk type information relative to the Internet users. The pooling equilibrium establishes the existence of a market for cyber-insurance. 1) Insurer Has No Information, Insured Obtains Information After Signing Contract: In this scenario, we assume that the insurer does not have information about the risk class of a user and it cannot observe the risk class if the user obtains information from any third party agency. Since, the cyber-insurer is the ﬁrst mover, it will account for the fact that users will be incentivized to take the help of a third party. We consider the case where the user may acquire information, and based on the information it decides on its self-defense investments. Let Uα(Ck, x) be the utility of a user in risk class α for a contract Ck, when it cannot observe the risk class it 10We also note that the optimization problems in the forthcoming sections are all examples of general principal-agent problems. 11A pooling equilibrium is one where the cyber-insurer has the same policy for both the classes (high and low risk) of users and the contract is in equilibrium. 25 is in. Let θUHC(Ck, x) + (1 −θ)UHC(Ck, x) be the utility of the same user when it can get information about its risk class from a third party agency. Thus, we denote the value of gaining information to a user is V I(Ck) and its deﬁned as V I(Ck) = θUHC(Ck, x) + (1 −θ)UHC(Ck, x) −Uα(Ck, x), 0 ≤θ ≤1 (26) We emphasize that V I(Ck) is zero if there is only type of risk class in the market. Now let xik be the solution to Equation 18, for risk class i and contract Ck. Since p′ LC < p′ α < p′ HC, for contract Ck, we have xLCk > xαk > xHCk. Thus, V I(Ck) > 0 due to the following relationship Ui(Ck, xik) > Ui(Ck, xαk), i ǫ {LC, HC} (27) The cyber-insurer maximizes its proﬁts by offering a contract Cd = (zd, cd). The optimization problem related to an insurer’s proﬁt is given as argmaxzd,cd,λi,ρid,ρi0 X i=LC,HC qi[1 −pi(xd)zd −pi(xd)cd] subject to Ui(Cd, xd) −Ui(0, x0) ≥0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (28) −p′ i(xd)[u(w0 −zd) −u(w0 −R + cd)] = 0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (29) −p′ α(x0)[u(w0) −u(w0 −R)] = 0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (30) where qi is the number of cyber-insurance contracts sold by the insurer for class i and x0 is the amount of self-defense investments when no insurance is purchased. λi, ρid, ρi0 are the Lagrangian multipliers related to constraints 28, 29, and 30 respectively. Constraint 28 is the participation constraint (Individual Rationality) stating that the expected utility of ﬁnal wealth of a user is atleast as much with cyber-insurance as without cyber-insurance. Constraints 29 and 30 state that Internet users will invest in optimal self-defense investments so as to maximize their utility of ﬁnal wealth (moral hazard constraints). Result and Intuition: The solution to the optimization problem in the binding case results in full insurance coverage if V I(Ck) = 0 and partial insurance coverage if V I(Ck) > 0. If V I(Ck) > 0, which is most likely the case, a user would prefer to have information on its risk class and accept contract Cd rather than accept contract Cα∗(based on utility comparisons). Our optimization problem also generates a pooling equilibrium contract, which is unique, and entails partial coverage at fair premiums. Thus, we infer that the cyber-insurer ﬁnds its optimal 26 to provide partial insurance coverage to its clients as it accounts for uncertainty of user risk types. Intuitively, a pooling equilibrium works as neither the insurer nor the insured has any information on user risk type before the user signs the contract, and as a result the cyber-insurer is not at a disadvantage with respect to gaining information on risk type relative to Internet users. 2) Insurer Has No Information, Insured Obtains Information Prior to Signing Contract: In this scenario, we assume that the insurer does not have information about the risk class of a user and it cannot observe the risk class if the user obtains information from any third party agency prior to signing the insurance contract. However, in this scenario a user that knows its risk type is at a signiﬁcant advantage. Since, the cyber-insurer is the ﬁrst mover, it will account for the fact that users will be incentivized to take the help of a third party. We consider the case where the user may acquire information about its risk type prior to signing the insurance contract, and based on the information it decides on the contracts and in turn its self-defense investments. We note here that users who remain uninformed will choose contract CLC as its beneﬁcial for the users to imitate the the low risk type users than be of the ‘expected’ type. We denote the value of gaining information to a user as V I(CLC, V IHC) and its deﬁned as V I(CLC, CHC) = θUHC(CHC, xHC) + (1 −θ)ULC(CLC, xLC) −Uα(CLC, xLC), 0 ≤θ ≤1 (31) The cyber-insurer maximizes its proﬁts by offering a contract Cd = (zd, cd). The optimization problem related to an insurer’s proﬁt is given as argmaxzi,ci,λi,γij,ρij,ρi0 X i=LC,HC qi[1 −pi(xi)zi −pi(xi)ci] subject to Ui(Ci, xi) −Ui(0, x0) ≥0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (32) Ui(Ci, xi) −Ui(Cj, xj) ≥0, i, j ǫ {LC, HC} (33) −p′ i(xd)[u(w0 −zi) −u(w0 −R + ci)] = 0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (34) −p′ i(xj)[u(w0 −zj) −u(w0 −R + cj)] = 0, i, j ǫ {LC, HC} (35) −p′ α(x0)[u(w0) −u(w0 −R)] = 0, i ǫ {LC, HC} (36) 27 where qi is the number of cyber-insurance contracts sold by the insurer for class i and x0 is the amount of self-defense investments when no insurance is purchased. λi, γij, ρij, ρi0 are the Lagrangian multipliers related to constraints 32-36 respectively. Constraint 32 is the participation constraint stating that the expected utility of ﬁnal wealth of a user is atleast as much with cyber-insurance as without cyber-insurance (Individual Rationality). Constraint 33 is the incentive compatibility constraint, which states that users prefer to accept contracts that are designed to appeal to their types. Constraints 34, 35, and 36 state that Internet users will invest in optimal self-defense investments so as to maximize their utility of ﬁnal wealth. Result and Intuition: Our optimization problem generates a separating equilibrium contract12, which is unique and entails partial cyber-insurance coverage at fair premiums. Thus, even in this case, the cyber-insurer ﬁnds it optimal to provide partial insurance coverage to its clients as it accounts for the uncertainty of user risk types. Intuitively, a separating equilibrium works as the cyber-insurer is aware of the fact that Internet users have risk type information before they lay down the contracts and thus plans different contracts for different types. In terms of optimal contracts and cyber-insurer proﬁts, the insurer is worse off than in the no-information case because in the latter case, the insurer extracts all user surplus, whereas in the former case, it extracts full surplus from the low risk type users but only extracts partial surplus from high risk type users. The separating equilibrium establishes the existence of a market for cyber-insurance. We have the following proposition based on the results of this section on information asymmetry cyber-insurance scenarios. Proposition 1: When neither the insurer nor the insured have any information regarding the risk class of a user, the cyber-insurer provides full insurance coverage to its users as their utility function becomes limiting risk averse, and partial insurance coverage otherwise. If the insurer does not have any information regarding the risk class of an insured, but the insured can gain risk class information after signing the insurance contract, then an insured who incurs zero cost for obtaining information ﬁnds it optimal to accept a cyber-insurance contract that provides it full insurance coverage while it ﬁnds it optimal to accept partial insurance coverage if the cost of obtaining information is greater than zero. If the insurer does not have any information regarding the risk class of an insured, but the insured can gain risk class information before signing the insurance contract, user welfare increases and cyber-insurer proﬁt decreases, when compared to the previous two cases. In all the three cases of information asymmetry there exists a market for cyber-insurance for single insurer cyber-insurance environments. 12A separating equilibrium is one where the cyber-insurer has different insurance contracts for both the classes (high and low risk) of users and the contract is in equilibrium. 28 VI. CONCLUSION In this paper, we developed a general mathematical theory of cyber-insurance contract pricing and user security investments in the Internet for single insurer cyber-insurance markets. We showed that in case of perfect insurance markets with no information asymmetry, full insurance coverage is the optimal coverage offered by the cyber-insurer, and cooperation amongst Internet users leads to better user self-defense investments w.r.t. improving overall network security. In the case of imperfect cyber-insurance environments where users are generally non-cooperative, we showed that partial insurance is the optimal cyber-insurance coverage offered by a proﬁt-maximizing cyber-insurer. Through our models, we also show that the market for cyber-insurance exists in single cyber-insurer insurance models for both, ideal and non ideal cyber-insurance environments. VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to acknowledge Professor Konstantinos Psounis for his valuable comments on the area of cyber- insurance. I would like to thank the ICDCS 2010 and MAMA 2010 audience for their questions and feedback on the papers [23][24]. In the end, I would also like to thank Professor Mung Chiang (Princeton University) and the EDGE Laboratory at Princeton University for hosting me during the summer of 2010, and giving occasional important feedback on my work on cyber-insurance. 29 REFERENCES [1] Information Asymmetry. Internet Wikipedia Source. [2] R. Anderson. Why information security is hard - an economic perspective. In Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2001. [3] R. Anderson and T. Moore. Information security economics and beyond. In Information Security Summit, 2008. [4] R. Bohme and G. Schwartz. Modeling cyber-insurance: Towards a unifying framework. In WEIS, 2010. [5] D.Fudenberg and J.Tirole. Game Theory. MIT Press, 1991. [6] J. Grossklags, N. Christin, and J. Chuang. Security and insurance management in networks with heterogenous agents. In ACM EC, 2008. [7] A. Hoffman. Internalizing externalities of loss prevention through insurance monopoly. Geneva Risk and Insurance Review, 32, 2007. [8] H.R.Varian. Microeconomic Analysis. Norton, 1992. [9] I.Ehrlick and G.S. Becker. Market insurance, self-insurance, and self-protection. Journal of Political Economy, 80(4), 1972. [10] L. Jiang, V. Ananthram, and J. Walrand. How bad are selﬁsh inverstments in network security. To Appear in IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2010. [11] J.Kesan, R.Majuca, and W.Yurcik. The economic case for cyberinsurance: In Securing Privacy in the Internet Age. Stanford University Press, 2005. [12] M. Katz and C. Shapiro. Network externalities, competitition, and compatibility. The American Economic Review, 75(3), 1985. [13] J. Kesan, R. Majuca, and W. Yurcik. Cyberinsurance as a market-based solution to the problem of cybersecurity: A case study. In WEIS, 2005. [14] H. Kunreuther and G. Heal. Interdependent security. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 26, 2002. [15] M. Lelarge and J. Bolot. Cyber insurance as an incentive for internet security. In WEIS, 2008. [16] M. Lelarge and J. Bolot. A local mean ﬁeld analysis of security investments in networks. In ACM NetEcon, 2008. [17] M. Lelarge and J. Bolot. Network externalities and the deployment of security features and protocols in the internet. In ACM SIGMETRICS, 2008. [18] M. Lelarge and J. Bolot. Economic incentives to increase security in the internet: The case for insurance. In IEEE INFOCOM, 2009. [19] R. P. Majuca, W. Yurcik, and J. P. Kesan. The evolution of cyberinsurance. Information Systems Frontier, 2005. [20] R. A. Miura-Ko, B. Yolken, N. Bambos, and J. Mitchell. Security investment games of interdependent organizations. In Allerton, 2008. [21] N.Shetty, G.Schwarz, M.Feleghyazi, and J.Walrand. Competitive cyber-insurance and internet security. In WEIS, 2009. [22] J. Omic, A. Orda, and P. V. Mieghem. Protecting against network infections: A game theoretic perspective. In IEEE INFOCOM, 2009. [23] R. Pal and L. Golubchik. Analyzing self-defense investments in the internet under cyber-insurance coverage. In IEEE ICDCS, 2010. [24] R. Pal and L. Golubchik. On economic perspectives of internet security. In Workshop on Mathematical (performance) Modeling and Analysis (MAMA), 2010. [25] T. R. Palfrey and S. Srivastava. Mechanism design with incomplete information. Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1989. [26] R.H.Coase. The problem of social cost. Journal of Law and Economics, 3, 1960. [27] S.Boyd and L.Vanderberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2005. [28] B. Schneier. Secrets and Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World. John Wiley and Sons, 2001. [29] B. Schneier. Insurance and the computer industry. Communications of the ACM, 44(3), 2001. [30] B. Schneier. Its the economics, stupid. In WEIS, 2002. [31] S.Radosavac, J.Kempf, and U.C.Kozat. Using insurance to increase internet security. In ACM NetEcon, 2008. [32] H. Varian. Managing Online Security Risks. The New York Times, June 1, 2000. 30 [33] M. E. Wetzstein. Microeconomic Theory: Concepts and Connections. South Western, 2004. [34] Y.Narahari, D.Garg, R.Narayanam, and H.Prakash. Game Theoretic Problems in Network Economics and Mechanism Design Solutions. Springer, 2009. [35] W. Yurcik and D. Doss. Cyberinsurance: A market solution to the internet security market failure. In WEIS, 2002.