When Googling it doesn’t work: The challenge of ﬁnding security advice for smart home devices ⋆ Sarah Turner[0000−0003−1246−1528], Jason Nurse[0000−0003−4118−1680], and Shujun Li Institute of Cyber Security for Society (iCSS), University of Kent, Canterbury, UK {slt41,j.r.c.nurse,s.j.li}@kent.ac.uk Abstract. As users increasingly introduce Internet-connected devices into their homes, having access to accurate and relevant cyber secu- rity information is a fundamental means of ensuring safe use. Given the paucity of information provided with many devices at the time of pur- chase, this paper engages in a critical study of the type of advice that home Internet of Things (IoT) or smart device users might be presented with on the Internet to inform their cyber security practices. We base our research on an analysis of 427 web pages from 234 organisations that present information on security threats and relevant cyber security ad- vice. The results show that users searching online for information are subject to an enormous range of advice and news from various sources with diﬀering levels of credibility and relevance. With no clear explana- tion of how a user may assess the threats as they are pertinent to them, it becomes diﬃcult to understand which pieces of advice would be the most eﬀective in their situation. Recommendations are made to improve the clarity, consistency and availability of guidance from recognised sources to improve user access and understanding. Keywords: Internet of Things, Cyber Security, Smart Home, Cyber Security Advice, Information, Online Search, Connected Home 1 Introduction Home Internet of Things (IoT) devices1 create diﬀerent risks to their users than more traditional Internet-connected devices, such as personal computers. At an individual level, these include threats to physical safety, home security, personal control and privacy [20], and at a societal level, facilitating botnets and other Internet-based crime [1]. As these devices may come with little in-built security, these risks can quite quickly spread further than the individual device; as such ⋆This is the author version of the article: Turner S., Nurse J., Li S. (2021) When Googling It Doesn’t Work: The Challenge of Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices. In: Furnell S., Clarke N. (eds) Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance. HAISA 2021. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol 613. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81111-2 10 1 The phrase “home IoT devices” here aligns with the list of devices found in [3]. arXiv:2108.03107v1 [cs.CR] 6 Aug 2021 2 S. Turner et al. the user must also understand how to manage the appropriate security of their entire home network. Home IoT devices are typically marketed on their min- imal interfaces [9], leaving the user to search elsewhere for guidance on issues such as cyber security. The availability of good quality, consistent and actionable information is crucial for keeping users safe and conﬁdent in their device use. Appropriately targeted levels of guidance for users is particularly necessary as cyber security is broadly considered a diﬃcult topic for individuals to manage, despite there being a general acceptance of individual accountability for per- sonal device use [17]. This is increasingly important for users, manufacturers, Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and policy-making bodies to understand and attempt to mitigate as sales in home IoT devices continue to grow apace, with users seemingly undeterred by frequent media stories of data breaches and other security risks. This paper provides a review of cyber security information available on the Internet in relation to home IoT devices. It is driven by three primary research questions: what information is made available about cyber security threats posed to individuals using home IoT devices, what information is given around how to mitigate those threats, and what type of organisations or entities provide that information. Using search methods that a typical user might undertake, we ﬁnd that that advice that users are presented with is typically generalised and not suﬃciently speciﬁc to act upon immediately, that the advice returned is often contradictory between sources, and that organisations that users would reasonably expect to have most responsibility for providing accurate content (manufacturers, governmental bodies, and ISPs) are not as prominently featured as they should be. Following a brief literature review in Section 2, and methodology in Section 3, we report our ﬁndings in Section 4. Section 5 considers the ways in which advice may need to be better tailored and managed to bolster users’ understanding and willingness to act. Section 6 considers limitations of the research, and how this could be addressed with future work. Section 7 concludes the paper. 2 Literature Review Previous research has looked at how users understand, evaluate and use cy- ber security methods. Cost, eﬀort to set up and perceived ineﬃcacy have been shown to stop individuals from adopting security tools such as anti-malware or password managers [4]. Tabassum et al. [19] found that some home IoT device owners applied security knowledge learned from other contexts (such as from using computers and the Internet) when securing their home devices, despite the diﬀerences in threats posed and potential mitigating actions required. It is widely recognised that this action, in part, arises from a wide-spread lack of accurate mental models about these devices [24], unless the user is already very technically minded [12]. Even if individuals do act to implement cyber security measures at home, they could be overwhelmed with the number of actions that are deemed to be Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 3 essential: Redmiles et al. [15] found 374 pieces of actionable advice in reviewing publicly available documentation, and argued that what is needed is eﬀective prioritisation of that advice. Prior to purchase, users rarely look for security and privacy information, but note that it is impossible to ﬁnd if they do [7]. Gcaza argued that security awareness is a necessary requirement for communities to consider themselves “smart” [8]: enhanced levels of clarity have been called for in both governmental and manufacturer’s advice, to promote tangible steps to security [18], a better understanding of how the technology works [23], and how the user is aﬀected in the case of a breach [25]. This clarity should extend to the practices of the manufacturer, in particular in relation to privacy and security concerns [11]. There is a clear beneﬁt to this: users will pay a premium for devices that have prominent details about security features [2]. 3 Methodology In order to understand what a home IoT device user might encounter when searching for information about how to secure devices that they may have, the decision was taken to search the Internet for cyber security guidance. This was done both in relation to general devices, using general search terms and reviewing the results that mentioned home IoT devices speciﬁcally, as well as for the most popular devices in the UK at this time: smart TVs (and streaming devices), and smart home assistants [21]. This decision was made because of the proportion of individuals voluntarily using these devices; ﬁndings for these speciﬁc types of devices may oﬀer more value by virtue of their ubiquity than other device types. Recent research has used similar practices in relation to posted user reviews [13] to understand what type of information users may encounter online on speciﬁc topics. Table 1: Generalised search queries Search terms Cyber security information Cyber security charities Cyber security awareness Internet of Things cyber security help Cyber security knowledge Cyber security help Cyber security education Cyber security support Cyber security learning Smart devices cyber security help Cyber security training How to stop being hacked Cyber security organisations How to secure my devices The general device resources were sought through search terms listed in Ta- ble 1, and reﬂect a ﬁnal list after researcher experimentation with various similar terms. Using these general search terms, pages in the results that had references to home IoT devices were captured for analysis. Search terms relating to speciﬁc 4 S. Turner et al. devices took the form “How to secure my smart TV/streaming device/smart speaker” along with “[manufacturer name] [device name] security” (e.g., “Ama- zon Echo security”). Speciﬁc brands were chosen based upon lists of “Top devices for 2020” focused on UK consumers.2 Having logged out of all browser accounts, cleared user history and using a VPN connection to a diﬀerent IP address in the UK, the search terms were entered into three search engines: Google, Bing and Duck Duck Go,3 and non-paid search results from the ﬁrst two pages of each search query were captured, on the understanding that less than one in ten users are likely to go to the second page of search results [14]. The pages were retrieved between August and December 2020. For both results from the gen- eralised search and speciﬁc devices searches, each page was then reviewed, and those that had content referring to home IoT devices were then taken forward for analysis. Following methodology from [1] and [22], a number of predeﬁned criteria were captured from each page, including who produced the information and when, the type of devices considered, and the threats and advice given. 4 Results 4.1 Sources of information The prominence of news and opinion outlets is clear in the results. 125 sources (53.41%) of the 234 organisations with web pages considered in the review were either recognised news organisations (such as The Guardian, Wired, CNet) or websites oﬀering news and opinion pieces of varying levels of specialty and ex- pertise, ranging from personal blogs to user-facing technology sites (such as PC Mag, ZD Net). The search also returned a volunteer-run cyber security helpline,4 oﬀering help across a wide range of cyber security issues. We also found that the favourable rankings of more traditional news sites acted to suppress sources of advice and information about device security in favour of prior security and data breaches: notably, a 2014 breach relating to Philips’ smart TV range still domi- nated the ﬁrst two pages of results, even in Google’s Featured Snippets,5 despite the age of the story. Although the majority of individual web pages returned were dated 2019 and 2020 (228 web pages, 53.40%, of 427 total web pages), 91 were undated, and 2 websites (from a retailer, and anti-malware provider) had content dating from 2011 (from the date given in the body of the article). Only nine information sources of the 234 organisations were aﬃliated with global governmental departments; there were three consumer protection bodies (such as Which? and Consumer Reports) and ﬁve additional not-for-proﬁt or 2 https://www.techradar.com/uk/news/best-smart-speakers, https:// www.techradar.com/uk/news/best-tv, https://www.techadvisor.co.uk/test- centre/digital-home/best-media-streaming-box-3580569/ 3 These account for nearly 97% of all UK search engine traﬃc as of July 2020 [10]. 4 https://www.thecyberhelpline.com 5 For more on Google’s Featured Snippets, see https://support.google.com/ websearch/answer/9351707. Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 5 charitable bodies. Conversely, bodies that may have been trying to sell a ser- vice related to security were much more common: there were nine anti-malware providers (such as Malwarebytes and Kaspersky), and ﬁrms oﬀering cyber secu- rity services (such as BullGuard, Digital Guardian and Cytelligence) accounted for 21 pages. There were 13 forum sites, both third-party (Reddit, Stack Ex- change) and manufacturer community pages. There were no sites from ISPs returned in the results. Table 2: Advice and Threat Types (a) Top ﬁve: threat types Type of threat Count Unauthorised access 144 Malware 22 Data theft 13 Botnet 9 Ransomware 8 (b) Top ﬁve: advice types Type of advice Count Strong password management 149 Limit data access 145 Better home network security 143 Turn oﬀfeatures/devices 117 Update software 113 4.2 Reported threats Discussions about cyber security typically arise from the need to secure some- thing from a speciﬁc and meaningful threat. In the review, 57 individual types of threats were raised; for the top ﬁve, see Table 2a. 144 websites referred to some form of unauthorised access to devices, most typically “hacking”, without further explanation (Table 3, #1). 39 web pages focused on either how to man- age after you have been hacked or avoiding being hacked, typically presenting reactive advice rather than explaining why it may be necessary to take proactive measures ahead of an event (Table 3, #2). Malware and ransomware were men- tioned a total of 30 times, with theft of personal data being mentioned 13 times. Botnets were referenced nine times. It is noticeable how many types of threat were referenced only once or twice throughout the review. 26 types of threat came up only once (examples ranging from domestic abuse, to ghostware and hacktivism). Lack of personal knowledge was framed as a threat (rather than a potential vulnerability) in ﬁve instances (Table 3, #3). In some cases, the publi- cation of speciﬁc academic or industry reports were reﬂected in the reporting of several news sources (Table 3, #4). In these cases, the threats reported upon are typically accompanied by the researchers’ views on how to mitigate the risk, al- beit at a high level, often without accompanying links to manufacturer guidance for speciﬁc devices. 6 S. Turner et al. 4.3 Types of advice needed and provided In total, there were 1,342 pieces of advice counted in the reviewed web pages, which, when coded for advice type provided a total of 54 unique topics. The top ﬁve advice types are listed in Table 2b. Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 7 Table 3: Examples of advice given (as referenced throughout text) Reference Source/date Issue raised Link (all last accessed 31 March 2021) 1 IoT for All (2020) (IoT blog) Generic threat explanation:“...they leave us vulnerable to cyber crime... [IoT devices] are top targets for hackers.” https://www.iotforall.com/iot-cyber-security-2 2 Lifewire (2019) (consumer technology blog) Reactive security guidance - things to do after you have been “hacked”: “no matter how you were hacked, you’re feeling vulnerable.” https://www.lifewire.com/securing-your-home -network-and-pc-after-a-hack-2487231 3 IoT Wiki (2019) (IoT enthusiast blog) Lack of knowledge a threat: “many individual users...still lack information about the risk” ’ https://internetofthingswiki.com/biggest- security-issues-iot-devices-face/1344/ 4 Tech Crunch (2019) Report of FBI advice on smart TV security https://techcrunch.com/2019/12/01/ fbi-smart-tv-security/ 5 Now TV (undated) (streaming devices) Password guidance:“DON’T use a word that’s found in the dictionary” https://help.nowtv.com/article/tips-to-help-you- keep-your-account-secure 6 Comparitech (2020) (consumer technology blog) Password guidance: ”Make changing the router password part of your monthly routine” https://www.comparitech.com/blog/information- security/secure-home-wireless-network/ 7 CSO Online (2016) (technology risk news site) Don’t use devices as intended: “Don’t connect your devices unless you need to... turn oﬀUPnP...be wary of cloud services” https://www.csoonline.com/article/3085607/8- tips-to-secure-those-iot-devices.html 8 Lifehacker (2018) (consumer blog) Non-speciﬁc advice: ”If you’re lucky, your router can broadcast a ‘guest network’...” https://lifehacker.com/how-to-keep-your-friends -from-trolling-your-chromecast-1828805478 9 Cytelligence (undated) (cybersecurity service) Non-speciﬁc advice: 10 ten list with no further details (e.g.“Stick with protected devices only...Disable unnecessary features...Secure your network fully”) https://cytelligence.com/cyber-security-and- smart-devices/ 10 Digital Trends (2021) (consumer technology blog) How to secure your Alexa device (with 12 suggestions) https://www.digitaltrends.com/home/how-to -secure-your-alexa-device/ 11 Wired (2020) (technology magazine) Guest networks: “grant your you guests access to a Wi-Fi connection without letting them get at the rest of your network — your Sonos speakers, the shared folders on your laptop...” https://www.wired.com/story/secure-your- wi-ﬁ-router/ 12 Kaspersky (undated) (anti-malware software) Guest networks: “[set] up guest networks for your IoT home devices” https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-center/ threats/how-safe-is-your-smart-home 13 How-To Geek (2020) (consumer technology blog) Guest networks: “you would connect all your IoT devices... and actual guests to the guest network” https://www.howtogeek.com/659084/ how-secure-is-your-home-wi-ﬁ/ 14 Google (undated) (Android devices) How to log your child into their Android device https://support.google.com/families/answer/ 7158477?hl=en 15 Help Cloud (undated) (consumer security service) Buy a more secure router: “[invest] in a sound WiFi router” https://www.helpcloud.com/blog/cybersecurity -experts-and-iot-smart-devices-and-smart-homes/ 16 Ready.gov (undated) (US governmental resource) Implication of need to buy more security: “[use] a password manager...use antivirus solutions...use a VPN...” https://www.ready.gov/cybersecurity 17 PCWorld (2019) (technology news site) Implication of need to buy more security: “Our favourite password manager is xxxx...you’ll need to pay an annual fee, but it’s worth it.” https://www.pcworld.com/article/3332211/ secure-android-phone.html 18 Real Simple (2020) (consumer blog) Buy reputable devices: “If you want to have IoT devices around...a wiser route is going to be by shopping in Apple or Google’s walled gardens...” https://www.realsimple.com/work-life/ technology/safety-family/smart-home -cyber-security 19 Norton (undated) (anti-malware software) Choose based on privacy and data policies: “What are the privacy policies? Will the provider store your data or sell it to a third party? How are updates enabled?” https://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-iot-smart -home-security-core.html 20 The Guardian (2020) (news site) Coverage of Sonos’ decision to stop software updates for old devices https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/ jan/23/sonos-to-deny-software-updates-to-owners -of-older-equipment 21 eBuyer (2018) (consumer technology blog) Software updates:“You should always update your smart devices...as soon as it becomes available” https://www.ebuyer.com/blog/2018/10/smart -devices-and-security/ 22 National Cyber Security Centre (2019) (UK government body) Wiping device of data: “you should ﬁrst perform a factory reset.” https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/smart-devices -in-the-home 8 S. Turner et al. There were 149 separate instances of recommended strong password man- agement (11.10% of the total pieces advice given), many of which gave advice contrary to the current guidance from the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) to use three random words to create a strong password. For example, two manufacturers explicitly suggested that words found in the dictionary should not be used (Table 3, #5), and suggestions to change passwords frequently were also common (Table 3, #6). Limiting the access services have to personal data was the second most fre- quent type of advice given in the reviewed web pages (145 instances; 10.80%), although precise guidance as to what this means for speciﬁc devices was not generally explained. Disabling some features (such as Universal Plug and Play) or turning oﬀthe device (or router, or WiFi) altogether was the fourth most common (117; 8.71%). The trade-oﬀs of doing these actions were again, largely unexplored (Table 3, #7). Speciﬁcity of advice was a common problem — the heterogeneity of devices left some pages assuming that devices had particular functionality as the premise of their advice (Table 3, #8), or providing a list of things to do with no guidance at all (Table 3, #9). Other pages gave so much advice as to run the risk of seeming overwhelming (Table 3, #10). There were 143 instances of advice around improving the strength of home networks. Advice around improving the strength of the user’s home network is particularly diﬃcult to follow, as the exact, typically relatively technical, steps vary upon the router in the house. In the general searches returned, there was no guidance about smart home security provided by ISPs. Without further searching in relation to the router owned by the individual, at ﬁrst glance it is impossible for the reader to know which pieces of advice (such as “use a VPN” or “set up a guest network”) would be feasible for their current router. Setting up a guest network, in particular, was recommended, but the speciﬁcs of doing so were varied: some pages suggested putting all the user’s devices on one network and anyone external on the other (Table 3, #11); others suggested keeping home IoT devices on one network, and the users’ other devices and guests on the second (Table 3, #12); and there was also suggestion to keep your personal non-IoT devices on one, and your home IoT devices and guests on the other (Table 3, #13). When manufacturer’s pages were returned in the reviewed web pages they were typically in a wiki-format, for a very speciﬁc topic — focusing how to change a speciﬁc setting rather than why you might do this — with minimal visual guidance: a checklist of steps to perform a speciﬁc activity on a speciﬁc device (Table 3, #14). In contrast, sites not aﬃliated with manufacturers oﬀer more generic advice. Not only did they provide little to speciﬁc device guidance or explanation as to what that would protect against, but they frequently suggested additional products that come at additional costs. Some are explicit: buying a more secure router (Table 3, #15), or, less clearly, products and services that can come with a cost, such as anti-malware, VPNs or password managers (Table 3, #16, #17). Other advice given includes to be choosy with home IoT device providers (even at a risk of becoming locked into a single provider) (Table 3, Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 9 #18), and performing pre-purchase checks such as reading privacy and data sharing/selling policies (Table 3, #19). There was a striking lack of information about end of life device manage- ment, with the exception of the negative press relating to Sonos’ decision to stop supporting older models in early 2020 (Table 3, #20), and general advice to “update software” (but not explicitly to be aware of the end of the supported life of your device) (Table 3, #21). Only the NCSC discussed wiping a device at the point of reselling or throwing away (Table 3, #22). 5 Discussion A signiﬁcant proportion of the guidance discovered in the reviewed web pages was not actionable for home IoT devices without further understanding or learning by the reader. The heterogeneity of home IoT devices, and the situations in which they are used, means that there there may be best practices that are speciﬁc to the device and its use. Diﬀerent designs mean that users cannot guarantee that they will be able to follow steps to disable settings, for example, to adhere to best security practices, assuming the speciﬁc device they have has the functionality to allow the user to access and alter security settings. Diﬀerent threats mean that some users may be best oﬀfollowing diﬀerent advice for the same device, but without an ability to accurately assess the threats and risks that the device poses to them, users are likely to fall back to behaviours that have worked for them before, which may not be appropriate in this case [19]. Furthermore, the most appropriate point to modify security settings may be at the home network, and not device, level. Calls to alter router settings, for example, are assuming that users have the technical conﬁdence, suﬃcient access to the controls within the home setting, and that their routers have the functionality to do so, none of which may be the case [24]. Additional suggestions to use more software — ideally, purchase software — is problematic: it introduces another barrier to eﬀective cyber security for those who cannot aﬀord it, and it is unclear how to apply such software across all devices in the home, if it is even possible to do so. The attrition rates for use of such software is likely to be high, particularly if its value in protecting devices is not visible or obvious [4]. Governmental and consumer awareness resources did appear, often low down in results. Despite their relative trustworthiness and validity as relevant and impartial cyber security information, such resources are often indistinguishable from other sources in search results. These other sources may have ﬁnancial interests in the framing of their advice (such as anti-malware providers), or the guidance may be from irrelevant or out of date sources. Users would beneﬁt from higher placement in search results of oﬃcial guidance from governmental agencies and manufacturers to try and provide up to date, speciﬁc information; inspiration could be taken from the work done to place prominent information from recognised expert bodies at the top of search results relating to COVID-19. Advice to choose devices based upon more agreeable privacy policies or calls to do research before purchase and buy “more secure devices” highlight a lack 10 S. Turner et al. of congruence between the advice and real life. Privacy policies are notoriously hard to read and comprehend [16], and oﬀer no ability for the user to negotiate the terms of their use. Calling upon users to research devices prior to purchase suggests that suﬃcient information is available to make a useful comparison of security features — not only is it hard to ﬁnd this information, it may not be meaningful or useful when found [7]. Providing standardised labels on packaging to provide information on fun- damental security features may be helpful to help users determine what is im- portant to them at the time of purchase[6], however manufacturers need to help users to assess and review their security settings throughout the life of their devices. This could take the form of periodic notiﬁcations on the device or asso- ciated app, reminding users to check key risk areas for a given device. This, of course, may be device speciﬁc, but manufacturers could use the opportunity to target common areas of concern based upon market intelligence or user research to ensure that users are given an opportunity to secure the most pressing risks. Manufacturers should avoid confusion by only providing guidance that is in line with the regional governmental cyber security agency, or in the case of inter- national manufacturers, picking advice from respected agencies or bodies, and referencing and linking back to those bodies so that users can see the underlying guidance themselves. As the results of the website review show, conﬂicting ad- vice is abundant as a result of the number of expert opinions in the ﬁeld, and so manufacturers can help users understand why they are promoting the security practices that they are. This also provides users an opportunity to learn about the evolving nature of cyber security information, and promotes the need for periodic reviews of the user’s security setup. Making users aware that guidance is dynamically evolving, and explaining how they will receive updated advice, is crucial, and facilitates user learning. Before being able to manage risks eﬀectively, however, users need to have more meaningful guidance about the types of threats that their devices may pose, so that they can appropriately evaluate what risk management means to them. This is a complex area, given the potential for misuse, abuse, and power imbalances [5]. However, manufacturers of devices could produce and point users to common device use cases, for example, with diﬀerent permutations of household device use (including how children and visitors may use the device). These use cases could explain the potential threats to the device in the situation, the implications of those threats, and how to mitigate those risks based upon the security features of the device. This would also be beneﬁcial for ISPs to oﬀer their customers in relation to home router setup, to ensure insecure devices do not pose unexpected threats, both inside and outside of the home. 6 Limitations and Future Work This work was an exploratory piece of research, to determine what the Internet oﬀered users when a number of generalised queries, and searches based upon the most popular devices reported in a recent survey were undertaken. The queries Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 11 were researcher-generated, meaning that they may not exactly reﬂect the types of queries typical home users would perform. Decisions to limit the pages used in the search may also not reﬂect a user’s behaviour when looking for a speciﬁc answer. While we did our best to mirror a reasonable keyword selection process and user-oriented approach to pages viewed, future work should involve users to generate these search terms, and use a more precise understanding of when users might stop looking for answers on a page. It may also be useful to do a wider review, as limiting the research to a handful of speciﬁc devices may ignore advice that is necessary for the security of other types of devices. The search results also point to the complex role that routers have in the smart home. Repeating the work with routers included as a speciﬁcally searched-for device may be beneﬁcial. 7 Conclusions Through a review of web pages, this research has shown that ﬁnding reputable, actionable and coherent guidance on how to approach securing home IoT de- vice against cyber security threats is challenging. Users are confronted by an overwhelming number of resources, often with little direct credibility or spe- ciﬁc actionable advice. We consider that improvements could be made by device manufacturers in particular in creating clearer, more actionable content, as well as a need for search engine results to reﬂect more prominently those resources from relevant organisations (notably manufacturers and governmental bodies) to ensure users ﬁnd the most speciﬁc advice for their situation. References 1. Blythe, J.M., Johnson, S.D., Manning, M.: What is security worth to consumers? investigating willingness to pay for secure Internet of Things devices. Crime Science 9(1) (2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40163-019-0110-3 2. Blythe, J.M., Sombatruang, N., Johnson, S.D.: What security features and crime prevention advice is communicated in consumer IoT device manuals and support pages? Journal of Cybersecurity 5(1), tyz005:1–tyz005:10 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyz005 3. Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport: Code of practice for consumer IoT security. Tech. rep., Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (2018) 4. Dupuis, M., Geiger, T., Slayton, M., Dewing, F.: The use and non-use of cyber- security tools among consumers: Do they want help? In: Proceedings of the 20th Annual SIG Conference on Information Technology Education. p. 81–86. ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3349266.3351419 5. Ehrenberg, N., Keinonen, T.: The technology is enemy for me at the moment: How smart home technologies assert control beyond intent. In: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. No. 401, ACM, New York, NY, USA (2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445058 6. Emami-Naeini, P., Agarwal, Y., Faith Cranor, L., Hibshi, H.: Ask the Experts: What Should Be on an IoT Privacy and Security Label? In: 12 S. Turner et al. 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). pp. 447–464 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40000.2020.00043 7. Emami-Naeini, P., Dixon, H., Agarwal, Y., Cranor, L.F.: Exploring how privacy and security factor into IoT device purchase behavior. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 534:1–534:12. ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300764 8. Gcaza, N.: Cybersecurity awareness and education: A necessary parameter for smart communities. In: Proceedings of the Twelfth International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information Security & Assurance (HAISA 2018). pp. 80–90. University of Plymouth (2018) 9. Geeng, C., Roesner, F.: Who’s in control? interactions in multi-user smart homes. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 268:1–268:13. ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300498 10. Johnson, J.: Market share held by the leading search engines in the United Kingdom (UK) as of June 2020. Market research report, Statista (2020), https://www.statista.com/statistics/280269/market-share-held-by- search-engines-in-the-united-kingdom/ 11. Kulyk, O., Milanovic, K., Pitt, J.: Does my smart device provider care about my privacy? investigating trust factors and user attitudes in IoT systems. In: Pro- ceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society. ACM (2020) 12. Luger, E., Sellen, A.: “like having a really bad PA”: The gulf between user expec- tation and experience of conversational agents. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 5286–5297. ACM (2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858288 13. Oyg¨ur, I., Epstein, D.A., Chen, Y.: Raising the responsible child: Collaborative work in the use of activity trackers for children. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Inter- act. 4(CSCW2) (Oct 2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3415228 14. Ray, L.: We surveyed 1,400 searchers about Google - here’s what we learned. Blog article (2019), https://moz.com/blog/new-google-survey-results 15. Redmiles, E., Warford, N., Jayanti, A., Koneru, A., Kross, S., Morales, M., Stevens, R., Mazurek, M.L.: A comprehensive quality evaluation of security and privacy advice on the Web. In: Proceedings of 29th USENIX Security Symposium. pp. 89–108. USENIX Association (2020), https://www.usenix.org/conference/ usenixsecurity20/presentation/redmiles 16. Renaud, K., Shepherd, L.A.: How to make privacy policies both GDPR-compliant and usable. In: Proceedings of 2018 International Conference On Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics And Assessment. pp. 1–8 (2018) 17. Renaud, K., Flowerday, S., Warkentin, M., Cockshott, P., Orgeron, C.: Is the re- sponsibilization of the cyber security risk reasonable and judicious? Computers & Security 78, 198–211 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2018.06.006 18. van Steen, T., Norris, E., Atha, K., Joinson, A.: What (if any) behaviour change techniques do government-led cybersecurity awareness campaigns use? Journal of Cybersecurity 6(1) (2020) 19. Tabassum, M., Kosinski, T., Lipford, H.R.: ”i don’t own the data”: End user per- ceptions of smart home device data practices and risks. In: Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2019). pp. 435–450. USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA (Aug 2019), https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2019/ presentation/tabassum Finding Security Advice for Smart Home Devices 13 20. Tanczer, L.M., Steenmans, I., Elsden, M., Blackstock, J., Carr, M.: Emerging risks in the IoT ecosystem: Who’s afraid of the big bad smart fridge? In: Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT - 2018. pp. 1–9. IET (2018) 21. techUK and GfK: The state of the connected home 2020. Industry re- port, techUK (2020), https://www.techuk.org/resource/the-state-of-the- connected-home-2020-report-edition-4.html 22. Turner, S., Quintero, J.G., Turner, S., Lis, J., Tanczer, L.M.: The exercisability of the right to data portability in the emerging Internet of Things (IoT) environment. New Media & Society 0(0) (0). https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444820934033 23. Voit, A., Niess, J., Eckerth, C., Ernst, M., Weing¨artner, H., Woundeﬁned- niak, P.W.: ‘It’s Not a Romantic Relationship’: Stories of Adoption and Aban- donment of Smart Speakers at Home. In: Proceedings of the 19th Interna- tional Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. p. 71–82. ACM (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3428361.3428469 24. Zeng, E., Mare, S., Roesner, F.: End user security and privacy con- cerns with smart homes. In: Thirteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2017). pp. 65–80. USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA (Jul 2017), https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2017/technical- sessions/presentation/zeng 25. Zou, Y., Danino, S., Sun, K., Schaub, F.: You ‘might’ be aﬀected: An empirical analysis of readability and usability issues in data breach notiﬁcations. In: Pro- ceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. p. 194:1–194:14. ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300424