Threat Scenarios and Monitoring Requirements for Cyber-Physical Systems of Flexibility Markets Nils M¨uller, Kai Heussen Wind and Energy Systems Department Technical University of Denmark Lyngby, Denmark {nilmu; kheu}@dtu.dk Zeeshan Afzal, Mathias Ekstedt Department of Computer Science KTH Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm, Sweden {zafzal; mekstedt}@kth.se Per Eliasson Foreseeti AB Stockholm, Sweden per.eliasson@foreseeti.com Abstract—The ongoing integration of renewable generation and distributed energy resources introduces new challenges to distribution network operation. Due to the increasing volatility and uncertainty, distribution system operators (DSOs) are seek- ing concepts to enable more active management and control. Flexibility markets (FMs) offer a platform for economically efﬁcient trading of electricity ﬂexibility between DSOs and other participants. The integration of cyber, physical and market domains of multiple participants makes FMs a system of cyber- physical systems (CPSs). While cross-domain integration sets the foundation for efﬁcient deployment of ﬂexibility, it introduces new physical and cyber vulnerabilities to participants. This work systematically formulates threat scenarios for the CPSs of FMs, revealing several remaining security challenges across all domains. Based on the threat scenarios, unresolved monitoring requirements for secure participation of DSOs in FMs are identiﬁed, providing the basis for future works that address these gaps with new technical concepts. Index Terms—distribution grids, ﬂexibility markets, threat sce- narios, monitoring requirements, cyber-physical power systems I. INTRODUCTION To reach the European goal of carbon neutrality in 2050, electricity generation and consumption must undergo radical changes. While the share of renewable generation needs to increase, electriﬁcation through devices such as electric vehi- cles (EVs) and heat pumpss (HPs) will drive up and reshape electricity demand. This extensive installation of distributed energy resources (DERs) will introduce more uncertainty and volatility, which radically changes usage of distribution net- works (DNs), potentially requiring expensive grid reinforce- ments. A widely discussed alternative is the use of end user ﬂexibility, referred to as demand response [1]. By reducing equipment loading at peak hours, distribution system operators (DSOs) can use local ﬂexibility to delay or avoid investments for reinforcement of transformers and power lines. As a framework for the integration of local ﬂexibility, a widely promoted approach are ﬂexibility markets (FMs) [2]. FMs constitute a competitive trading platform for electricity ﬂexibility in a geographically restricted area such as towns [3]. A typical setup of market participants consists of a DSO, a balance responsible party (BRP), several aggregators and This work is funded by the Innovation Fund Denmark under File No. 91363 and the Swedish Energy Agency as part of the ERA-Net project HONOR. a market operator. Aggregators pool and manage multiple small residential ﬂexibility assets. In this way, they enable end users to participate in FMs. DSOs and BRPs typically are ﬂexibility buyers, while aggregators constitute sellers. DSOs procure ﬂexibility for operational purposes, such as congestion management or voltage control. BRPs buy ﬂexibility for portfolio optimization. By adjusting power demand of aggre- gated ﬂexibility assets, aggregators make proﬁts according to ﬂexibility contracts. Owners of ﬂexibility assets earn proﬁts by providing DERs, such as HPs or EVs, to aggregators. The foundation of a FM is a strong integration of cyber, physical and market domains of multiple actors, making it a system of cyber-physical systems (CPSs). While this cross- domain integration sets the foundation for efﬁcient deploy- ment of ﬂexibility assets, it introduces new vulnerabilities to involved participants and their systems. By applying end user ﬂexibility to avoid critical grid states, DSO grid operation becomes partly dependent on third parties. Moreover, the required use of information and communication technology (ICT), including less secure public networks, and the strong coupling with the physical and market domain opens doors for cyber criminals, aiming at social or ﬁnancial damage. In addition, incorporating home devices of end users as ﬂexibility assets also requires transmission, storage and processing of sensitive data. This paper contributes to the identiﬁcation and analysis of possible risks and security requirements in the CPSs of FMs. The work ﬁrst provides an overview of possible threat scenarios, which result from a comprehensive and original sys- tem analysis. Thereafter, unresolved monitoring requirements for secure participation of DSOs in FMs are derived from the threat scenarios. Objective of this work is to provide a foundation and motivation for future works addressing the identiﬁed gaps with new technical concepts and case studies. A. Related work As highlighted by [4] and [5], the inﬂuence of ﬂexibility on power system security constitutes a research gap, as most ex- isting works focus solely on beneﬁts of ﬂexibility usage. Some works shed light on speciﬁc physical threats, such as uncertain customer behavior [6] or ﬁnancial threats, e.g. ﬁnancial risk due to the intermittent nature of ﬂexibility assets [7]. Other arXiv:2111.03300v2 [eess.SY] 14 Feb 2023 works such as [8] and [9] investigate cyber threats introduced by the application of new smart grid technologies, including smart meters (SMs) and advanced metering infrastructure. In [10], a number of cyber threats are identiﬁed and mapped to grid assets and threat agents. The work also addresses possible security controls to reduce exposure to threats. However, these works only focus on particular threats or threat categories and do not speciﬁcally address FMs. In [5] possible positive and negative impacts of ﬂexibility on the security of supply are discussed from a physical and a cyber perspective. A major physical threat is seen in the rebound effect of ﬂexibility activations which may shift load peaks, and results in even more severe situations. A ﬂexibility- induced cyber threat is seen in load-altering attacks that may impact the bulk power system without compromising better protected assets on transmission level. To the best of the authors knowledge, [5] is the only work that provides cyber and physical threat scenarios in the context of ﬂexibility. However, as threat scenarios are no major concern of the work, it does not provide a comprehensive and systematic overview. Moreover, it neither takes characteristics of FMs into account nor derives unresolved security requirements to motivate new research directions for future studies. B. Contribution and paper structure The contribution of this paper is twofold: • Systematic formulation of threat scenarios for the CPSs of FMs. Scenarios result from an original system analysis and consider origins in various domains, emphasizing the interaction among the cyber, physical and market domain. • Identiﬁcation of unresolved monitoring requirements for DSOs participating in FMs as foundation for new tech- nical concepts and case studies addressing these gaps. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a systematic overview of threat scenarios for the CPSs of FMs. Section III identiﬁes monitoring requirements for participation of DSOs in FMs. Finally, Section IV con- cludes the paper. II. THREAT SCENARIOS This section is concerned with the systematic formulation of threat scenarios for the CPSs of FMs. Subsection II-A presents the scenario formulation approach, followed by scenario de- scriptions in Subsections II-B to II-J. A. Threat scenario formulation To describe and compare scenarios with various back- grounds, a domain-neutral formulation is required, which still captures key information. Fig. 1 represents the applied formu- lation concept. Threat origin, affected component and threat impact are selected as domain-independent key information. The threat origin comprises two groups, namely external and internal. In Table I the considered origins are listed and allo- cated to one of the two groups, supplemented by information on their background. Table I indicates the broad spectrum of origins, enabling a holistic threat scenario investigation. Cyber-physical systems of flexibility markets External Internal Social Financial Privacy Threat origin Threat impact Services Data Devices Affected component Market ICT Power system Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the threat scenario formulation. Typically, a critical situation develops around a speciﬁc component or component type in a system. A cyber attacker will most likely try to manipulate a speciﬁc data stream or device to launch the attack. A famous example is the Industroyer malware attack on the Ukrainian power system, which targeted the control of circuit breakers in substations [11]. An aggregator who falsely determines the potential of its portfolio will affect a ﬂexibility service traded in the market. At the end of every scenario there is a potential negative impact, typically of social or ﬁnancial nature. However, other impact, such as a loss of private information, are taken into account. To allow for a better overview and to demonstrate how fundamentally different threat origins can result in sim- ilar critical situations, scenarios are grouped by the affected component. Table II summarizes the scenarios, including threat origins, given as numbers referring to Table I, and impacts. B. SM-based scenarios SMs may provide data to aggregators for ﬂexibility planning and veriﬁcation. Meters typically use a programmable logic controller (PLC) interface to communicate with the utility and have capability to remotely switch power on or off. 1) Unauthorized access and modiﬁcation of SM data: Cyber-criminals could gain access to sensitive meter data such as consumption, credentials, and ﬁrmware information by exploiting known software vulnerabilities or by decrypting PLC communication that uses weak encryption. Additionally, if cyber-criminals take over the meter communication with the aggregator (e.g., by using the encryption key), they can send wrong consumption data. The asset owner may be ﬁned for breaking contracts and removed from the portfolio. Having hold of private data and options for ﬁnancial damage, cyber- criminals may aim at blackmailing ﬂexibility asset owners. TABLE I OVERVIEW AND DESCRIPTION OF THREAT ORIGINS. Nr. Threat origin Group Background 1 Device failure Internal accidentally 2 Human error Internal accidentally 3 Market actors Internal ﬁnancial gain 4 Insiders Internal dissatisfaction 5 Consumer behavior Internal randomness 6 Weather External volatility, randomness 7 Price signals External volatility, randomness 8 Organized cyber-criminals External ﬁnancial gain 9 State-sponsored actors External political 2) Accessing and controlling multiple SMs: As extension of Scenario II-B1, state-sponsored actors may aim at accessing and controlling multiple SMs. Attackers may use weaknesses of SMs, such as static encryption keys. Typically, SMs de- ployed by a DSO share the same encryption key. Thus, if attackers gain access to the encryption key of one SM, they are able to extract useful information, such as the energy consumption behavior, of entire neighborhoods. At this stage, attackers can also take over remote on/off switching. In [12], it is demonstrated how attackers can cause line trips through load oscillations by exploiting the switching capability of multiple SMs. The result may be power outages, resulting in social and ﬁnancial cost. Another attack path to target multiple SMs is to launch a remote or physical attack on meter data concentrators. C. Local controller-based scenarios Various actors of FMs rely on local controllers. By inter- facing the cyber and physical domain, they constitute critical system components, introducing potential threats. 1) Modiﬁcation of substation controller: Primary and some secondary substations are equipped with controllers, such as PLCs, remote terminal units (RTUs) and intelligent electronic devices (IEDs). State-sponsored actors could place infected rootkits onto one or multiple local controllers. By sending ma- licious control signals to circuit breakers and protection relays attackers could damage grid facility and disconnect customers. To hide the attack, normal operation values could be returned to the central control room. In [13], it is demonstrated that attackers can create such false data that will not raise an alarm by existing algorithms for bad data detection. 2) Modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility asset controller: Flexibility assets such as EVs or HPs are often controlled by home en- ergy management systems (HEMSs). These internet-connected systems typically have remote control capability and are based on off-the-shelf soft- and hardware, making them vulnerable to cyber attacks and asset owner modiﬁcation. Flexibility asset owners may aim at ﬁnancial gain by modifying setpoint boundaries or increasing setpoints before a service is activated, which manipulates the ﬂexibility service of the aggregator. Organized cyber-criminals could make use of weak password security and encryption to gain access to individual HEMSs. To blackmail customers, attackers may collect sensitive data, change setpoints to impair customer comfort and degrade ﬂexibility assets, or increase costs by raising consumption or mitigating contracted ﬂexibility activations. State-sponsored actors could inﬁltrate local controllers of multiple small or individual large ﬂexibility assets. By changing the setpoints or switching assets on or off, they could introduce load peaks or oscillations to trigger transformer protection, resulting in customer disconnection. A coordinated attack on ﬂexibility assets and grid protection mechanisms may result in severe physical damage of grid facilities and blackouts. 3) Failure of large ﬂexibility asset controller: The activa- tion of large ﬂexibility assets may fails due to soft- or hardware failures. Compared to defects of small assets, the impact may be severe. An industrial plant could provide ﬂexibility by reducing production capacity during times of high EVs charging. Under these conditions, an activation failure could lead to congestion at the transformer. TABLE II SUMMARY OF THE IDENTIFIED THREAT SCENARIOS. Nr. Threat scenario Impact Origin SM-based scenarios 1 Unauthorized access & modiﬁcation of SM data privacy 3,8 2 Accessing and controlling multiple SMs social, privacy 8,9 Local controller-based scenarios 3 Modiﬁcation of substation controller social, ﬁnancial 9 4 Modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility asset controller social, privacy 3,8,9 5 Failure of large ﬂexibility asset controller social, ﬁnancial 1 Flexibility activation signal-based scenarios 6 Tamper or disrupt ﬂexibility activation signals social, ﬁnancial 4,8,9 7 Unintentional wrong activation of ﬂexible assets social, ﬁnancial 2 8 Parallel ﬂexibility activations with opposing or reinforcing effects ﬁnancial 3,7 Historical data-based scenarios 9 Compromised data on DSO or aggregator data historian ﬁnancial 1,2,4,9 Flexibility request-based scenarios 10 High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexi- bility needs ﬁnancial 5,6,7 11 Uncertainty about power system states due to frequent ﬂexibility activations social, ﬁnancial 3 12 Parallel events resulting in sudden change of ﬂexibility needs social, ﬁnancial 1,2,7,9 Flexibility offer-based scenarios 13 Place wrong ﬂexibility offers on the FM social, ﬁnancial 4,9 14 High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexi- bility offers ﬁnancial 5,6 Flexibility measurement or schedule-based scenarios 15 Disrupt or manipulate ﬂexibility measurements and schedules ﬁnancial, privacy 3,8 Flexibility asset-based scenarios 16 Unavailability of ﬂexibility assets ﬁnancial 1,5,8,9 Vendor soft- and hardware-based scenarios 17 Compromise vendor software and systems social, ﬁnancial 9 D. Flexibility activation signal-based scenarios Flexibility activation signals comprise activation requests from ﬂexibility buyers to sellers, and activation signals from aggregators to small ﬂexibility assets. The transmission is typically conducted via public networks. 1) Tamper or disrupt ﬂexibility activation signals: Aggre- gator employees may launch insider attacks, such as sending activation signals at wrong times or preventing required ﬂexi- bility activations. Insiders of DSOs may send wrong activation requests. Flexibility activation signals could also be manip- ulated by cyber-criminals or state-sponsored actors through false data injection attacks, exploiting insecure authentication or weak encryption. Attackers could also ﬂood ﬂexibility as- sets with activation signals to disrupt the activation process. In all these scenarios, attackers could prevent or temper required ﬂexibility activations to leave congestions or voltage violations unresolved or even intensify them. Moreover, attackers could initiate critical grid states by activating ﬂexibility assets. In both cases high social and ﬁnancial costs are likely. 2) Unintentional wrong activation of ﬂexibility assets: Hu- man errors of various actors, such as DSOs or aggregators, and in different process steps, from determining ﬂexibility needs or potential to preparing and sending activation requests, could initiate wrong ﬂexibility activations. Equivalent to intentional attacks, damage could be of social and ﬁnancial nature. 3) Parallel ﬂexibility activations with opposing or reinforc- ing effects: Flexibility services can be requested by different actors with distinct purposes. While a DSO may intend to pre- vent congestion, a BRP aims at portfolio optimization. Thus, ﬂexibility services with opposing effects could be activated simultaneously, resulting in ﬁnancial damage as services may be procured without achieving the desired outcome. At the same time, price-based demand response introduces additional ﬂexibility activations in DNs. DSOs might be unaware of fu- ture behavior of price-driven loads during ﬂexibility planning. Thus, a risk for network violations exists if the DSO service is reinforced by price-driven ﬂexibility. E. Historical data-based scenarios Historical data is of high importance for several actors in FMs. Threats emerge from potential data loss or manipulation. 1) Compromised data on DSO or aggregator data histo- rian: Historical data provide necessary information for ﬂexi- bility planning, activation and veriﬁcation. Typically, they are not checked for integrity, after being stored. However, integrity could be affected by human and transfer errors or attacks. Model development based on compromised data will weaken performance or might render models useless. Financial damage may result due to imprecise ﬂexibility planning and veriﬁca- tion. In severe cases, power system monitoring techniques may fail, leaving critical grid conditions unresolved. F. Flexibility request-based scenarios To procure ﬂexibility, DSOs and BRPs submit ﬂexibility requests to the FM. Depending on the market concept, requests can be formulated from intraday to months ahead. 1) High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexibility needs: DNs face increasing volatility due to the dependency of distributed energy resources on weather, consumer behavior and price signals. At the same time, low-voltage (LV) grid states are highly underdetermined due to low real-time meter device coverage (low observability). The resulting uncertainty complicates forecasting of ﬂexibility needs and requires DSOs to request larger ﬂexibility capacities, which increases costs. 2) Uncertainty about power system states due to frequent ﬂexibility activations: DSOs request and activate ﬂexibility to avoid or postpone expensive grid extensions. However, frequent activations may break correlation between the few available measurements (e.g. primary substation and weather data) and system states at the end of LV feeders [14]. Thus, FM operation might deteriorate the accuracy of LV state estimation, making critical states potentially unobservable to DSOs. Based on inaccurate state estimations a DSO might activate unnecessary or even counteracting ﬂexibility, resulting in ﬁnancial costs. In severe cases, the triggering of protection mechanisms might cause disconnection of customers. 3) Parallel events resulting in sudden change of ﬂexibility needs: Different events, including line failures or shut down of large industrial loads, can lead to sudden change of the DNs condition. Additionally, load peaks from simultaneous EV charging and other new events will be introduced to DNs in the upcoming years. If they occur during ﬂexibility activation periods, such events may change grid condition in a way that activation is not required or even critical. Moreover, state-sponsored actors could launch attacks on other systems, e.g. large battery energy storage systems or industrial plants, during activation periods to modify the grid condition. Due to the low observability of DNs, the detection of such events may be challenging. G. Flexibility offer-based scenarios To sell ﬂexibility, aggregators submit ﬂexibility offers to FMs. Depending on the market scheme, ﬂexibility can be offered from intraday to months ahead. 1) Place wrong ﬂexibility offers on the FM: If offers on the market do not reﬂect the actual potential, ﬂexibility activations will likely not match the problem to solve. State-sponsored actors or insiders could tamper offers or place wrong offers on the market in the name of veriﬁed market participants. In less serious cases aggregators will have to pay a refund. In severe cases critical grid conditions might not be solved by wrong ﬂexibility offers. 2) High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexibility offers: Determination of ﬂexibility potential is subject to uncertain- ties. The capacity of an aggregator portfolio is dependent on the comfort requirements of customers, weather, customer behavior and other portfolio changes. In particular, weather and customer behavior uncertainties directly translate into uncertainty of ﬂexibility offers. Moreover, in most cases the demand of small ﬂexibility assets is controlled indirectly, e.g by adjusting temperature setpoints. As the translation of temperature setpoints to power consumption is dependent on external factors, additional uncertainties are introduced during activation. Unreliable offers mainly reduce ﬁnancial proﬁt for aggregators. However, severe uncertainties might make the use of ﬂexibility for DSOs unreliable, and lead to more expensive but reliable alternatives, such as grid extensions. In case a DSO relies on a ﬂexibility offer to solve a critical condition, high uncertainty might result in disconnection of end users. H. Flexibility measurement or schedule-based scenarios Reliable measurements of ﬂexibility assets are required for service planning, activation and veriﬁcation. Besides SM readings, additional data may come from devices such as pho- tovoltaic meters. To deﬁne the activation process, aggregators and ﬂexibility asset owners agree on ﬂexibility schedules. 1) Disrupt or manipulate ﬂexibility measurements and schedules: Several actors might have an interest in manipulat- ing ﬂexibility measurements and schedules either by gaming or data tampering. Aggregators or ﬂexibility asset owners could manipulate ﬂexibility activation recordings for ﬁnancial gain. Exemplary, for baseline services an asset owner could increase consumption before an activation period, to imitate a service by just returning to normal consumption level. Cyber-criminals that can sniff and modify data in networks of aggregators could compromise measurements, e.g. for blackmailing. One way is the modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility portfolio recordings to disrupt the service veriﬁcation process. As a result, aggregators might receive ﬁnes for not fulﬁlling contractual agreements. Attackers could also modify the schedules which aggregators send to the assets, resulting in wrong activations. In mild cases, aggregators will be ﬁned. In severe cases, wrong activations might trigger grid protection, resulting in disconnection of customers and thus high social costs. I. Flexibility asset-based scenarios Flexibility assets comprise a variety of DERs, owned by end users or companies. They reach from small loads such as refrigerators to large loads, including industrial processes. 1) Unavailability of ﬂexibility assets: During activation periods assets may not be available due to software failures, manual setpoint altering by asset owners or unforeseeable changes in the physical process of industrial ﬂexibility assets. Moreover, cyber-criminals or state-sponsored actors could dis- turb communication by denial-of-service attacks. Since asset owners break the contract in cases of a failed activation, such scenarios would result in a ﬁnancial penalty. Especially in case of large ﬂexibility assets, unavailability might lead to unresolved congestions and voltage violations. J. Vendor soft- and hardware-based scenarios All actors of FMs are dependent on services of third-parties, such as vendors. The required trust introduces potential risks. 1) Compromise vendor software and systems: State- sponsored actors could install malicious code in vendor soft- or hardware. Attackers may install a backdoor in a PLC. This backdoor can later be used to manipulate DSO operation in many ways. The impact of such events may go beyond single end users, as EV or HP vendors provide soft- or hardware to multiple asset owners. The recent SolarWinds hack demonstrates the severity of such attacks [15]. III. UNRESOLVED MONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR SECURE DSO PARTICIPATION IN FMS This section identiﬁes unresolved monitoring requirements for DSOs participating in FMs For that purpose, threat scenar- ios from Section II are mapped onto a generic cyber-physical monitoring architecture of DSOs, shown in Fig. 2. 1) Quantifying ﬂexibility-induced uncertainty: Threat sce- nario II-F2 discusses that frequent ﬂexibility activations could introduce uncertainty to LV state estimation. At the same time, ﬂexibility is used to operate power systems closer to capacity limits. Under these conditions, deterministic point estimations may fail silently, potentially impacting critical decisions. On the contrary, probabilistic approaches provide information about reliability of estimates. Incorporating such uncertainty quantiﬁcation into the decision making process allows situational adjustment of control actions and thus to DSO Cyber-physical architecture Decision Support Layer Distribution management system Distribution management system Supervisory Control Layer Perceptual Execution Layer Data Transmission & Storage Layer Authentication Server Credentials Weather data Price information Load forecasts & grid states Flexibility requests Clearing results Unverified supervision of automated control decisions Gateways Securely transmitted control signals Securely transmitted internal & external data Unverified state monitoring, decision options & automated control decisions Verified decision support results for external communication Grid states & load forecasts Unverified manual control decisions Social event & network data Network traffic data Communication networks Securely transmitted internal & external data Securely transmitted data Securely transmitted internal & external data Unverified power system monitoring Network traffic data Substation Sealed process level data Raw measure- ments & local control signals Raw measurements Raw measurements & local control signals Substation Raw SM measurements Raw SM measurements Sealed & integrity checked process level data Neighborhood SM SM Integrity checking parameters µPMU µPMU RTU Historian Integrity checked historical data 05482 05482 05482 05482 Network traffic data Verified control decisions Human-machine interface Credentials Unverified system analysis Verified state monitoring, decision options & automated control decisions Multi-domain system-wide condition & risk monitoring Report Report Process level integrity checking Report Historical data integrity checking Report Report Power system monitoring Report Reports Report Verification of manual control & supervision Field crew Maintenance activity information IED IED Software updates Parameter & data actuality & quantity Decision support verification DER data Software actuality Access & traffic information Integrity checking parameters Control room situation Software actuality FM platform TSO & other DSOs Social data provider Energy markets Weather service DER operator Vendors Authenticated external information Credentials Report Authentication of external data sources Internal communication network monitoring Process level integrity checking Process level integrity checking Fig. 2. Cyber-physical monitoring architecture of a DSO. Colored ﬁelds: generic monitoring requirements, which are considered a prerequisite to observe the DSO’s CPS. Red links: information for power system operation. Black links: information for fulﬁlling monitoring requirements. Yellow links: reports of monitoring solutions satisfying the requirements. lower the risk for wrong actions while retaining efﬁciency. Thus, quantifying ﬂexibility-induced uncertainty is seen as important requirement for power system monitoring (Fig. 2). Uncertainty quantiﬁcation also improves veriﬁcation of data-driven decision support tools (Fig. 2). Models that in- crease uncertainty under appearance of unseen ﬂexibility acti- vation events or system states provide operators with require- ment indicators for retraining or additional input features [14]. Finally, uncertainty quantiﬁcation facilitates analyzing the system-wide CPS condition (Fig. 2). If critical power system states are reported to a system-wide multi-domain condition monitor, probability of occurrence could be included. The improved interpretability could reduce false alarms, enabling more reliable system-wide monitoring of a DSO’s CPS. 2) Flexibility activation detection: Several threat scenarios (II-C2, II-D2, II-D3) demonstrate that ﬂexibility can be ac- tivated without the DSO being aware of it. Such activations might occur intentionally through other market participants and cyber attackers or unintentionally due to human errors. To enable immediate counteractions in case of critical activations, early detection is required. Moreover, early detection would allow online veriﬁcation of successful activation of DSO- requested ﬂexibility by the operator [16]. Thus, for power system monitoring (Fig. 2) automated real-time detection of ﬂexibility activations is seen as an important requirement. 3) Flexibility scenario monitoring: In threat scenario II-F1 and II-F2, respectively, the difﬁculty of determining ﬂexibility needs and ﬂexibility activation demand is described. Especially under the aforementioned uncertainty and low observability of DNs, ﬂexibility planning becomes a challenging task for DSOs. Thus, tools providing probabilistic power system state scenarios under various ﬂexibility services are considered an important requirement for power system monitoring (Fig. 2). Depending on the market concept, tool requirements may look different. For day or week-ahead procurement, tools will be required to provide state forecasts under various ﬂexibility services. Market concepts that include real-time procurement of ﬂexibility require tools for mapping available ﬂexibility offers onto the current grid state. 4) Integration of multi-domain information: Many threat scenarios demonstrate a strong FM-induced interaction and dependency among cyber, physical and market domains. Cyber attackers may intend to cause physical damage (II-C2, II-D1, II-E1) or disturb market actions (II-B1, II-G1, II-H1), while insufﬁcient coordination (II-D3) or wrong ﬂexibility offers (II-G1) on the FM platform may result in physical impact. This interdependency has two consequences: on the one hand, un- derlying events are likely to leave traces in multiple domains. On the other hand, the root cause of a speciﬁc event can lay in different domains. As an example, a denial-of-service attack against activation of a large ﬂexibility asset leaves traces in physical measurements and cyber network data. Moreover, the activation failure could also be caused by a hardware failure or human error. Thus, a monitoring requirement is seen in the integration of information from multiple domains to i) incorporate all available traces and ii) take possible threat origins in various domains into account. Among others, this somewhat general requirement could facilitate process-level or historical data integrity checking (Fig. 2). One example is the integrated detection and classiﬁcation of cyber attacks and physical faults by fusion of cyber network and physical process data [17]. A central challenge for integration of multi-domain information is seen in the fusion of heterogeneous data. 5) Interpretable unsupervised intrusion and anomaly detec- tion for ﬂexibility assets: In threat scenario II-B2 and II-C2, respectively, it is demonstrated that edge devices, such as SMs and HEMSs, have security weaknesses (e.g., static encryption keys) which can be exploited by cyber attackers. FMs will make power system operation partly dependent on such less protected devices. Thus, from the perspective of the DSO, advanced intrusion and anomaly detection systems for ﬂex- ibility assets are considered as an important requirement for process level integrity checking (Fig. 2). Challenges include computational constraints, lack of data describing the various attacks and anomalies, and the multitude of anomalies (e.g. cyber attacks, soft- and hardware faults and human errors) complicating root cause analysis. A potential approach is seen in machine learning-based unsupervised anomaly detection on information stream level. Unsupervised models do not require observations of anomalies. Moreover, detecting anomalies on information stream level (e.g. destination IP addresses, customer setpoints and power demand) instead of system- wide, retains interpretability for root cause analysis also in an unsupervised scheme. IV. CONCLUSION In this work, threat scenarios for the CPSs of FMs are systematically formulated and presented. 17 scenarios across all system domains are introduced, revealing several remaining security challenges. Among others, scenarios include simulta- neous control of multiple ﬂexibility assets by cyber attackers exploiting weak encryption, and uncertainty in the determina- tion of ﬂexibility needs and offers due to low meter coverage and high load variability in DNs. Based on the threat scenarios, unresolved monitoring requirements for secure participation of DSOs in FMs are identiﬁed. Requirements include inter- pretable unsupervised anomaly detection for ﬂexibility assets on information stream level and quantiﬁcation of ﬂexibility- induced uncertainty. By identifying such unresolved monitor- ing requirements, a foundation for new technical concepts and case studies addressing these gaps is provided. REFERENCES [1] K. Spiliotis, A. I. Ramos Gutierrez, and R. Belmans, “Demand ﬂexi- bility versus physical network expansions in distribution grids,” Applied Energy, vol. 182, pp. 613–624, 2016. [2] X. Jin and Q. Wu, “Local ﬂexibility markets: Literature review on concepts, models and clearing methods,” Applied Energy, vol. 261, 2020. [3] P. Olivella-Rosell et al., “Optimization problem for meeting distribution system operator requests in local ﬂexibility markets with distributed energy resources,” Applied energy, vol. 210, pp. 881–895, 2018. [4] M. Alizadeh et al., “Flexibility in future power systems with high renewable penetration: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 57, pp. 1186–1193, 2016. [5] I. B. Sperstad, M. Z. Degefa, and G. Kjølle, “The impact of ﬂexible resources in distribution systems on the security of electricity supply: A literature review,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 188, 2020. [6] B. Zeng, G. Wu, J. Wang, J. Zhang, and M. Zeng, “Impact of behavior- driven demand response on supply adequacy in smart distribution systems,” Applied Energy, vol. 202, pp. 125–137, 2017. [7] T. Ghose, H. W. Pandey, and K. R. Gadham, “Risk assessment of micro- grid aggregators considering demand response and uncertain renewable energy sources,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1619–1631, 2019. [8] A. Chehri, I. Fofana, and X. Yang, “Security risk modeling in smart grid critical infrastructures in the era of big data and artiﬁcial intelligence,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 6, 2021. [9] M. Costache and V. Tudor, “Security aspects in the advanced meter- ing infrastructure,” M.Sc. Thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Civil and Environment, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2011. [10] L. Marinos, “Smart grid threat landscape and good practice guide,” White Paper, European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA); ENISA: Attiki, Greece, 2013. [11] N. Kshetri and J. Voas, “Hacking power grids: A current problem,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 91–95, 2017. [12] F. Alanazi, J. Kim, and E. Cotilla-Sanchez, “Load oscillating attacks of smart grids: Demand strategies and vulnerability analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00350, 2021. [13] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against state estimation in electric power grids,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, p. 21–32, 2009. [14] N. M¨uller, S. Chevalier, C. Heinrich, K. Heussen, and C. Ziras, “Uncer- tainty quantiﬁcation in LV state estimation under high shares of ﬂexible resources,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 212, 2022. [15] S. Peisert et al., “Perspectives on the solarwinds incident,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 7–13, 2021. [16] N. M¨uller, C. Heinrich, K. Heussen, and H. W. Bindner, “Unsupervised detection and open-set classiﬁcation of fast-ramped ﬂexibility activation events,” Applied Energy, vol. 312, 2022. [17] N. M¨uller, C. Ziras, and K. Heussen, “Assessment of cyber-physical intrusion detection and classiﬁcation for industrial control systems,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), 2022.