Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computers & Security journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose Perspectives of non-expert users on cyber security and privacy: An analysis of online discussions on twitter Nandita Pattnaik 1 , ∗, Shujun Li 2 , ∗, Jason R.C. Nurse 3 Institute of Cyber Security for Society (iCSS) & School of Computing, University of Kent, Canterbury, CT2 7NP, UK a r t i c l e i n f o Article history: Received 28 May 2022 Revised 1 October 2022 Accepted 6 November 2022 Available online 9 November 2022 Keywords: Security Privacy Home user Social media User behavior Smart home Machine learning Data mining Topic modeling Sentiment analysis a b s t r a c t Many researchers have studied non-expert users’ perspectives of cyber security and privacy aspects of computing devices at home, but their studies are mostly small-scale empirical studies based on online surveys and interviews and limited to one or a few speciﬁc types of devices, such as smart speakers. This paper reports our work on an online social media analysis of a large-scale Twitter dataset, covering cyber security and privacy aspects of many different types of computing devices discussed by non-expert users in the real world. We developed two new machine learning based classiﬁers to automatically create the Twitter dataset with 435,207 tweets posted by 337,604 non-expert users in January and February of 2019, 2020 and 2021. We analyzed the dataset using both quantitative (topic modeling and sentiment analysis) and qualitative analysis methods, leading to various previously unknown ﬁndings. For instance, we observed a sharp (more than doubled) increase of non-expert users’ tweets on cyber security and privacy during the pandemic in 2021, compare to in the pre-COVID years (2019 and 2020). Our analysis revealed a diverse range of topics discussed by non-expert users, including VPNs, Wi-Fi, smartphones, laptops, smart home devices, ﬁnancial security, help-seeking, and roles of different stakeholders. Overall negative sentiment was observed across almost all topics in all the three years. Our results indicate the multi-faceted nature of non-expert users’ perspectives on cyber security and privacy and call for more holistic, comprehensive and nuanced research on their perspectives. © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) 1. Introduction People’s use of the internet has been increasing at a very fast pace in the past decades. A recent report from Statista ( Johnson, 2022b ) informed that roughly 62% of the world population and 94% in Western Europe were using the internet as of January 2022. In terms of computing devices they use to access the internet, another 2021 report from Statista ( Johnson, 2022a ) found that almost 91% of global users used smartphones, followed by 71% using laptops and/or desktop PCs, 30% from smart TVs, and 14% from other smart home devices. The same report also showed that most (65%) of global users accessed the internet from their own computing devices, while a signiﬁcant portion (30%) used work devices. With the wide use of the internet and differ- ∗Corresponding authors. E-mail addresses: np407@kent.ac.uk (N. Pattnaik), S.J.Li@kent.ac.uk (S. Li), J.R.C.Nurse@kent.ac.uk (J.R.C. Nurse) . 1 ORCID: 0 0 0 0-0 0 03-1272-077X 2 ORCID: 0 0 0 0-0 0 01-5628-7328 3 ORCID: 0 0 0 0-0 0 03-4118-1680 ent types of computing devices, cyber security and privacy issues have also been increasing, and many internet users have developed some awareness of such issues, especially on phishing and mal- ware ( Johnson, 2021a ). With the increasing use of the internet and computing de- vices by global users, and the consequent cyber security and pri- vacy issues, it is important to understand the perspectives of users regarding such topics. User perspective in this context in- cludes the levels of awareness, perception, concerns, decisions, behaviors, and the day-to-day practice of the users in relation to cyber security and privacy. Many researchers have conducted studies to better understand users’ perspectives on cyber security and privacy. Related studies have mainly focused on two differ- ent types of users – ‘experts’ with a good level of cyber security knowledge and ‘non-expert users’ who normally lack cyber secu- rity awareness ( Rahman et al., 2021 ). However, most past stud- ies Kang et al. (2015) ; Wu and Zappala (2018) primarily relied on data self-reported by a relatively small number of recruited human participants, and often qualitative methods were used due to the small scale of the empirical studies ( Rahman et al., 2021 ). Results obtained from such smaller-scale self-reported data are very useful https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.103008 0167-4048/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 but normally cover only a narrow range of topics, and key ﬁndings can be diﬃcult to generalize to a larger population of users. There- fore, working with larger-scale data collected from the wild, e.g., real-world data collected from online social network (OSN) plat- forms, can help provide more evidence and insights supplementary evidence to past studies ( Andreotta et al., 2019 ). However, ﬁltering out speciﬁc cyber security and privacy related data, especially for non-expert users, from the massive number of online posts is a challenging task not only because of the sheer volume, but also because it is not trivial (1) to ﬁlter out cyber security and privacy related posts as non-expert users will not always use cyber secu- rity or privacy related keywords in their posts and (2) to decide whether the author of a post is an expert or a non-expert user or an organization. Furthermore, there has been a general trend of the focus on the computing devices covered, from more traditional ones such as PCs and smartphones ( Camp, 2009; Kang et al., 2015; Wash, 2010 ) to smart and IoT (Internet of Things) devices more recently ( Barbosa et al., 2020; Cannizzaro et al., 2020; Chalhoub and Flechais, 2020; Sturgess et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2018; Zimmermann et al., 2019 ). Most related research in the literature arguably focused more on one type of computing device (e.g., smartphones or smart speak- ers), therefore does not cover the wider range of computing de- vices modern users are using in different contexts of cyber security and privacy. We, therefore, decided to do a large-scale analysis of cyber se- curity and privacy related user discussions on social media, espe- cially those posted by non-expert users that are related to different types of computing devices (both smart and traditional ones) used in a home networking environment. This paper reports our analy- sis of nearly half a million tweets about non-expert users’ discus- sions on Twitter, one of the largest OSN platforms, to provide a more holistic view of their perspectives on cyber security and pri- vacy. We chose to focus on non-expert users in our study, since the rich knowledge and different mental models of cyber security experts make them a less representative user group to study nor- mal users’ perspectives ( Busse et al., 2019; Camp et al., 2008 ). The dataset covers three 2-month periods in three years (January and February in 2019, 2020 and 2021), allowing us to look at yearly trends as well as changes before the ﬁrst global COVID-19 lock- downs and during the COVID-19 pandemic. More speciﬁcally, our research questions (RQs) are deﬁned as follows: RQ1 How can we identify cyber security and privacy related tweets posted by non-expert users? RQ2 What do non-expert users normally discuss online, regard- ing their personal perspectives on cyber security and pri- vacy? RQ3 How did such discussions on Twitter evolve in the past three years, including before and during the COVID-19 pandemic? RQ4 What was the general sentiment of non-expert users when talking about cyber security and privacy on Twitter? RQ5 To what extent did the general sentiment of non-expert users change in the past three years, including before and during the COVID-19 pandemic? Based on the above RQs, our main contributions can be sum- marized below: 1. We designed a machine learning based classiﬁer to detect spe- ciﬁc tweets related to cyber security and privacy with a good performance. To the best of our knowledge, past studies have focused on topics such as classiﬁcation of cyber security related accounts ( Mahaini et al., 2019 ) or cyber threats ( Dionísio et al., 2019 ). 2. We also developed a second machine learning based classiﬁer to detect non-expert user accounts with a good performance. We were unaware of any work on such classiﬁers. 3. By applying topical modeling to our dataset, we identiﬁed a wide range of topics non-expert users discussed on cyber secu- rity and privacy, such as on VPNs, Wi-Fi, smartphones, laptops, smart home devices, ﬁnancial security, and different stakehold- ers. 4. A trend analysis of non-expert users’ discussions on cyber secu- rity and privacy across the three years showed some noticeable changes of topics, e.g., a substantial increase of VPN use during the COVID-19 pandemic compared with before it. 5. By applying sentiment analysis to the datasets and tweets be- longing to different topics, this study noticed a general negative sentiment of non-expert users when discussing cyber security and privacy on Twitter. 6. A trend analysis of non-expert users’ sentiment across the three years revealed some previously unknown patterns, e.g., the sen- timent seemed to have become more polarized over years, with the percentage of more neutral posts decreasing year on year. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After brieﬂy intro- ducing some related work in Section 2 , the methods we used for this study are explained in detail in Section 3 . Section 4 reports re- sults and ﬁndings of the research, followed by Section 5 in which further discussions, limitations of the research and our future work are presented. The last section concludes the paper. 2. Related work With the growing level of social media activities, online users have been generating massive textual content ( Andreotta et al., 2019 ), and researchers have been increasingly utilizing such user-generated content (UGC) to study different online phenom- ena ( Yin and Kaynak, 2015 ). However, to the best of our knowl- edge, such studies have not attracted suﬃcient attention from re- searchers working on users’ perspectives on cyber security and pri- vacy. In this section, we introduce some selected works we con- sider closely related non-expert users perspectives on cyber secu- rity and privacy, and how these have been analysed in OSN plat- forms such as Twitter. Different aspects of non-expert users’ cyber security behav- iors have been studied by researchers, e.g., conscious/unconscious decisions of non-expert users to recognize different types of cy- ber threats ( Kang et al., 2015; Wu and Zappala, 2018 ), ignoring necessary updates of important software ( Ion et al., 2015 ), pre- ferring not to use encryption ( Wu and Zappala, 2018 ), hesitance about the use of MFA (multi-factor authentication) ( Das et al., 2020 ), password managers ( Alodhyani et al., 2020 ) and diﬃculties in conﬁguring security settings such as for biometric authentica- tion Wolf et al. (2019) . Jones et al. (2021) warned that insecure behaviors of non-expert users such as above lead to many secu- rity vulnerabilities. Hasegawa et al. (2022) conducted a qualitative analysis of 445 cyber security related posts by non-expert users on a question-and-answer website and found the topics of ques- tions ranged from identiﬁcation and responses to cyber security incidence to usability of security software. We did not see any past research based on large-scale analysis of online discussions on cy- ber security and privacy of non-expert users. However, some researchers leveraged public data such as those on Twitter to study different aspects of user perspectives on cy- ber security and privacy. For instance, Saura et al. (2021) ex- plored the Twitter-verse for cyber security issues commonly discussed by home users in the context of smart living en- vironments. Kowalczuk (2018) used a mixed method to ana- lyze tweets and Amazon reviews of smart speakers users and found enjoyment as the primary reason for using smart speakers. Sriram et al. (2021) conducted a cross-sectional analysis on both Twitter and Reddit data to identify cyber security and privacy con- 2 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 cerns of end users of IoT devices. Zubiaga et al. (2018) conducted a longitudinal study of tweets between 2009 and 2016 with topic and sentiment analysis to understand the general public’s percep- tion of IoT devices. Such research often focused speciﬁcally on IoT and smart home devices, so did not cover the wide range of topics including devices that often feature in user discussions. Some other researchers used public data to monitor and an- alyze citizens’ feelings about security, which covers more phys- ical aspects such as crime in a neighborhood or a city. For in- stance, Chaparro et al. (2020) and Camargo et al. (2016) explored Twitter data to understand behaviors of online users from speciﬁc geo-locations. Greco and Polli (2021) proposed some methods for calculating real-time public perception of cyber security measure- ment. Such work does not have a smart home focus. Some researchers focused on privacy-related behaviors of on- line users, especially about unintentionally leaking personal in- formation on OSN platforms such as Twitter. For instance, pri- vacy features were explored by Caliskan Islam et al. (2014) to detect users’ online behaviors and Aghasian et al. (2020) to de- velop a privacy scoring model for measuring such behaviors. Khazaei et al. (2018) reported how online users who would like to remain private online can be detected, so businesses can respect their privacy preferences. In addition, some researchers also stud- ied leakage of personal information via online users’ discussions, e.g., Sharma et al. (2022) ( Sharma et al., 2022 ) reported that Twit- ter users often unintentionally disclosed personal information on- line while discussing the COVID-19 pandemic, as observed in four countries (Australia, India, the UK, and the US) and in three dif- ferent periods of the pandemic (before, during and after the lock- down) in each country. Another related research topic is machine learning based auto- matic detection of cyber security related discussions on OSN plat- forms such as Twitter Alves et al. (2021) , Dionísio et al. (2019) , Mittal et al. (2016) . Most of these types of work are often OSINT (open source intelligence) related and have normally a strong tech- nical focus, instead of users’ perspectives. As reviewed above, although some researchers have leveraged data collected from OSN platforms to study cyber security and privacy-related behaviors of online users, their focus is relatively narrow and did not look at a wide range of topics online users discussed over time. This paper aims to ﬁll such a gap. 3. Methodology As mentioned in Section 1 , we decided to focus on online dis- cussions of non-expert users to better capture their perspectives on cyber security and privacy. This required us to develop two classiﬁers – one ‘CySecPriv’ classiﬁer for detecting tweets related to the topic (cyber security and privacy) and one ‘NonExpertUser” classiﬁer for detecting the target user group (non-expert users), in order to address RQ1. After developing the two classiﬁers and test- ing their performance, we applied them to a large set of tweets collected using the Twitter API to produce the dataset we worked with. Topical modeling, sentiment analysis, and additional trend analysis were then conducted on the dataset to answer RQs 2–5. 3.1. Classiﬁer selection For each of the two classiﬁcation tasks, we trained and tested ﬁve candidate classiﬁers using a labeled dataset in order to identify the best classiﬁer: 1) four traditional machine learning algorithms, including logistic regression, support vector machines (SVM) with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel, random forest and XGBoost, working with n-gram features, and 2) a BERT-based classiﬁer that can extract features via a more automated process. The four traditional classiﬁers based on n-gram features were trained, 5-fold cross-validated, and tested using Scikit- learn sckit learn , a popular open-source machine learning package. For the BERT-based classiﬁer, we chose the ‘BERT-base’ model with 110 million parameters, 12 transformer layers, and 12 self-attention heads ( Devlin et al., 2018 ), implemented as part of the widely used library Huggingface Face . We used Google Colab’s NVIDIA Tesla P100-PCIE-16 GB GPU’s to run all classiﬁers. According to the results shown in Table 1 , for both types of classiﬁers (‘CySecPriv’ and ‘NonExpertUser’), the BERT-based algo- rithms produced better results. Hence for the later steps we de- cided to use the BERT-based classiﬁers to automatically process our dataset. 3.2. Data collection We collected tweets using Twitter’s Academic API v2 4 . Due to the rate limits of the API 5 , collecting tweets in all 36 months in 2019–2021 could take a long time, likely 36 weeks (more than 8 months) according to our experiments. Therefore, we decided to collect tweets over a two-month period each year. In order to de- termine which two representative months to select, we considered two factors. Firstly, according to some recent statistics ( Sabanoglu; Salesforce; Ward, 2022 ), the level of product sales is often the highest in November and December, i.e., at the end of the year just before the Christmas holiday period. If we assume that users would spend some time using new devices during the holiday pe- riod, they would more likely to share their experiences and to ask questions on social media in January and February. Secondly, since we would like to collect data that can support a comparison of online discussions of English-speaking users before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, we looked at the time when the global lock- down started worldwide. This seems to be in March 2020 for most countries where English-speaking users lived ( BBC, 2020 ). Based on the two factors, we decided to choose January and February as the two-month period, which allowed us to have two years before the ﬁrst wave of global COVID-19 lockdowns (2019 and 2020) and one year during the pandemic (2021). In order to retrieve relevant historical tweets in the past, we needed to use Twitter’s Search API, which required us to use some keywords as search terms. Determining the most appropri- ate search keywords was not trivial, as non-expert users do not use technical terms expert users would use for discussing cyber security and privacy-related topics. Hence, we decided to use some general computing keywords and names of different com puting devices non-expert users often use at home. Rather than deﬁning such keywords ourselves, we used the following sources as the ba- sis to derive such keywords, in order to avoid any biases we may have. 1. Some keywords selected from an empirical study : We conducted an online anonymous survey with 50 participants using the Proliﬁc survey platform 6 , on frequently used keywords by non- expert users while searching for cyber security and privacy- related queries online. This survey was approved by the Uni- versity of Kent’s Central Research Ethics Advisory Group. Out of 144 keywords reported by the participants, we selected 23 ones based on their nature (computing/security-related term), and the frequency of use (used by more than one participant). We avoided using too broad keywords such as ‘Google’, ‘Inter- net’ and ‘Windows’. 4 https://www.developer.twitter.com/en/products/twitter- api/academic- research 5 There were multiple limits for our approved Twitter Academic API account: 1 app per account, 10 million tweets/month per account, 300 requests / 15 minutes per app, 1 request/second per app, and 500 results per response. 6 https://www.proliﬁc.co/ 3 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Table 1 Performance comparison of different machine learning models for the two classiﬁcation tasks of our work Model Precision Recall F1-Score Model Precision Recall F1-Score BERT-based 0.92 0.92 0.91 BERT-based 0.94 0.95 0.94 Logistic Regression 0.90 0.84 0.87 Logistic Regression 0.83 0.90 0.86 SVM (RBF kernel) 0.92 0.76 0.83 SVM (RBF kernel) 0.68 1.0 0.81 Random Forest 0.94 0.61 0.74 Random Forest 0.70 1.0 0.83 XGBoost 0.90 0.86 0.88 XGBoost 0.73 0.98 0.84 (a) ‘CySecPriv’ classiﬁer (a) ‘NonExpertUser’ classiﬁer 2. A number of lists of most used computing devices at homes re- ported in the research literature , including: • a list of different types of smart home devices shown in Ta- ble 3 of ( Huang et al., 2020a ), • a list of commonly used smart devices shown in Table I of ( Gai et al., 2018 ), • a list of smart devices used at home in multi-user scenarios, as shown in Table I of ( Huang et al., 2020b ), • a list of smart devices shown in Fig. 3 of ( Cannizzaro et al., 2020 ), and • a list of common devices owned by smart home users shown in Table 1 of ( Zheng et al., 2018 ). 3. Commonly used computing devices included in the following re- ports from Statista : • a 2020 report on market shares of electronic devices used by internet users in the UK to go online ( O’Dea, 2021 ), • a 2020 report on the average number of devices residents have access to in UK households ( Laricchia, 2022 ), • a 2020 report on devices used to access Wi-Fi in UK homes ( Alsop, 2021 ), and • a 2021 report on devices used by global users to access in- ternet ( Johnson, 2022a ). Based on the above sources and our general knowledge on rel- evant keywords and computing devices used by non-expert home users, we derived 37 unique keywords: ‘account’, ‘Amazon Alexa’, ‘Amazon Echo’, ‘app’, ‘breach’, ‘e-reader’, ‘Google Home’, ‘iPad’, ‘iPhone’, ‘android’, ‘laptop’, ‘smart mobile’, ‘password’, ‘smart TV’, ‘tablet’, ‘WiFi’, ‘Bluetooth’, ‘smart camera’, ‘smart watch’, ‘smart doorbell’, ‘smart switch’, ‘Chromecast’, ‘smart speaker’, ‘smart hub’, ‘smart light’, ‘printer’, ‘smart thermostat’, ‘VPN’, ‘smart kettle’, ‘smart refrigerator’, ‘smart washing machine’, ‘smart meter’, ‘smart toy’, ‘smart door lock’, ‘smart baby monitor’,‘smart plug’, and ‘games console’. Using the 37 keywords with Twitter’s Academic Search API, we obtained 13.7 million tweets for further processing. We de- cided not to collect retweets as they include only repeated discus- sions. In other words, our collected data consists of original tweets, replies and quoted tweets (without the quoted original tweet), and other meta-data such as ‘authorId’, ‘userName’, ‘createdAt’, ‘loca- tion’, ‘publicMetrics’. 3.3. Data cleaning, tokenization and vectorization To facilitate feature extraction for the candidate classiﬁers, we needed to conduct some pre-processing steps, including data cleaning, tokenization and vectorization. Special characters, hyper- links, references to audio and video ﬁles, and tweets without any text but only hashtags and/or mentions were taken out as the ﬁrst step of data cleaning. Emojis were transferred to their equivalent words or phrases in English using the ‘emot’ library ( Shah, 2022 ). For the n-gram-based classiﬁers, we also applied stop-word re- moval and lemmatization to prepare them for tokenization. The processed data was then tokenized using the BOW (bag of word) method ( Sethy and Ramabhadran, 2008 ) and vectorized using the TF-IDF (Term Frequency and Inverse Document Frequency) vector- izer of the Scikit-learn library 7 to prepare a matrix of TF-IDF fea- tures. This TF-IDF matrix is then fed into the four n-gram based classiﬁers as input features. The pre-processing of data differed for the BERT-based classi- ﬁer since it works in a very different way from the traditional ma- chine learning algorithms we used. BERT, a neural network-based encoder technique reported in Devlin et al., 2018 , works with a bidirectional contextual word embedding modeling method. The model essentially stacks a series of encoder structures based on the transformer architecture ( Vaswani et al., 2017 ) and pre-trains the model by masking out a certain percentage of the words, which forces the model to learn the words. Deliberate retention of special characters such as question marks, exclamation marks, and commas were implemented and no stop-word removal tech- niques were used to maintain the BERT model’s original effective- ness ( Hofstätter et al., 2020 ) as the model inherently calculates its algorithm by using context-based attention. Once the pre-trained model was loaded, it was ﬁne-tuned with the help of our context- speciﬁc pre-processed tweets. This was then fed to the Hugging Face transformer library to implement TensorFlow’s BERT-based se- quence classiﬁcation module ( Google, 2022 ) to classify our data. After completion of the pre-processing steps, we noticed many duplicate tweets in our data, which were possibly bot-generated. We decided to remove the duplicate tweets before any further pro- cessing. Finally, after the pre-processing and deduplication proce- dure, we obtained 13.7 million tweets as the raw data for label- ing and classiﬁcation to produce the dataset of cyber security and privacy-related tweets. 3.4. Developing classiﬁers: BERT-based Following common practices Devlin et al. (2018) , Hao et al. (2019) , we decided to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained BERT model us- ing our cyber security-speciﬁc dataset. We used the deep learning library TensorFlow Keras 8 and ktrain 9 (a lightweight wrapper for Tensorﬂow Keras) to build our classiﬁers. We did not freeze any of the existing pre-trained layers and hence the weights of all lay- ers were updated during the backpropagation. Our processed tweet dataset was applied to the pre-trained BERT module for ﬁne-tuning to get to the ﬁnal classiﬁers (see Fig. 1 ). The learner object in the ktrain library used the training and validation data to ﬁne-tune the classiﬁer with a small batch size of 16. The other important parameters for ﬁne-tuning are mentioned below. Learning rate: This is an important parameter that controls the continually updated error proportion in the model weight at the end of each batch of the training examples. A large learning rate gives a faster running model, but might produce sub-optimal model weights. Conversely, a smaller learning rate might produce a more optimal set of weights but could be very slow to run. 7 https://www.scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature _ extraction.text.TﬁdfVectorizer.html 8 https://www.tensorﬂow.org/text/tutorials/classify _ text _ with _ bert 9 https://www.github.com/amaiya/ktrain 4 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Fig. 1. A diagram showing how the ‘CySecPriv’ and ‘NonExpertUser’ classiﬁers are constructed. Fig. 2. Visually inspect loss plot and select learning rate associated with falling loss. The ‘ learner rate ﬁnd ’ module facilitated ﬁnding a balanced learn- ing rate of ‘5e-5’ (see Fig. 2 ) for both the ‘CySecPriv’ classiﬁer and ‘NonExpertUser’ classiﬁer. epoch number: We experimented on different epoch numbers (1–20) and noticed the best output was from 2 epochs where there was the least amount of gap between the loss in the training and validation dataset indicating a good ﬁt in both the classiﬁers case. 3.4.1. Cyber security and privacy (‘cysecPriv’) classiﬁer To develop a classiﬁer, we ﬁrst need a labeled dataset. Based on our expert knowledge, we decided to use a number of criteria to manually label a tweet as ‘CySecPriv’ or ‘NonCySecPriv’, depending on, if the tweet fulﬁlls any of the following points: 1. at least one term from the following established lists of cyber security and privacy-related terms: • https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/ncsc-glossary • https://www.bsigroup.com/en- GB/Cyber- Security/ Glossary- of- cyber- security- terms/ • https://www.getsafeonline.org/glossary/ • https://www.niccs.cisa.gov/about-niccs/ cybersecurity-glossary 2. at least one keyword included in the list of terms of the cyber security taxonomy reported in ( Mahaini et al., 2019 ) 10 , 3. at least one hashtag related to any of the above terms, and 10 https://www.cyber.kent.ac.uk/research/cyber _ taxonomy/ 5 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 4. at least one phrase or sentence that clearly describes a cyber security or privacy related topic, i.e., a tweet like ‘my computer must have been infected after I downloaded a movie’ 11 . The labeling process was completed in two different stages. First, 9,0 0 0 tweets (1,500 from each of the six months in our dataset) were randomly selected and labeled by the ﬁrst author ac- cording to the above-mentioned criteria. This led to an imbalanced dataset with only 5% of tweets being labeled ‘CySecPriv’. To pro- duce a more balanced dataset for training and testing purposes, we collected a set of 18,0 0 0 (3,0 0 0 from each month) tweets based on a different set of cyber security related keywords (within the scope of the ﬁrst two items of the list 1) and labeled them separately. Some tweets (676) in this set were discarded because either they were duplicate tweets or they did not contain any real original content excepting ‘@mentions’ and/or hashtags. Labeled data from both stages were combined to produce our ﬁnal labeled dataset with 26,324 tweets, including 14,041 CySecPriv tweets and 12,282 NonCySecPriv tweets. The database is still unbalanced, but not sig- niﬁcantly so. Our experiments showed that such a dataset already worked relatively well, so we did not apply any over- or under- sampling to make the dataset perfectly balanced. 3.4.2. ‘NonExpertUser’ Classiﬁer For this classiﬁer, we followed a multi-class approach to label a Twitter account into four different classes based on its meta-data (username, display name, user proﬁle and location), as shown be- low. 1. Non-expert user: a user account satisfying both of the following criteria: (a) the proﬁle is a personal account, indicated by the use of a ﬁrst-person pronoun (i.e., ‘I’, ‘me’) at least once, or a noun or a phase representing a person, e.g., a name like ‘Bob’ or a relation such as ‘wife’ or ‘son’. (b) the proﬁle clearly suggest that the account owner is not an expert on cyber security or privacy, e.g., if the profession is declared to be ‘actor’, ‘painter’, ‘musician’ or ‘trader’. (There might of course be some cases where the candidate does not declare themselves to be a security expert, but actually are in the oﬄine world.) 2. Expert: a personal account (following the above criterion 1(a) for non-expert users) that used at least one recognized cyber security or privacy-related term (as described in the keyword list 1 of the ‘CySecPriv’ classiﬁer) to describe their work, educa- tion or expertise, e.g., ‘security expert’, ‘cryptographer’, ‘hacker’ or a ‘student studying a cyber security course’. 3. Non-Person: a user account that belongs to an organization, a group of people, or a community. 4. Unknown: when the information in the user proﬁle is insuﬃ- cient to draw any conclusion about the type of account. To help facilitate the manual labeling process, we leveraged the widely used NER (named entity recognition) module in the Spacy library GmbH to automatically detect entities related to persons and organizations. To support the training and testing of the non-expert user clas- siﬁer, we sampled 10,200 accounts randomly from the raw dataset and collected their meta-data. The meta-data was pre-processed to exclude non-ASCII characters and special characters that are not exclamation marks, question marks, full stop signs, double and sin- gle quotation marks, and to convert emojis into equivalent English phrases using the ‘emot’ library. The pre-processed meta-data was 11 Note that this quoted tweet is an artiﬁcially created illustrative example to avoid exposing any real tweet in our dataset for data protection reasons. then input to the NER module of SpaCy to detect any named enti- ties. Taking the NER tags as useful references, the sample accounts were then manually labeled by the ﬁrst author into the above- mentioned four classes, leading to 7,860 labeled as non-expert users, 825 as experts, 1,143 as non-person, and 394 as unknown. The labeled dataset was highly imbalanced, but we decided not to modify (over- or under-sample) it as current research has shown evidence ( Aduragba et al., 2020; D’Sa et al., 2020; Madabushi et al., 2020; Oak et al., 2019 ) that some machine learning models such as BERT-based ones can still work well with imbalanced data. In addition, although being a multi-class classiﬁer, for our purpose it was used more like a binary classiﬁer for detecting one class (non- expert users). For such a binary classiﬁer, the dataset imbalance is less serious: 7,860 vs. 825 + 1 , 143 + 394 = 2 , 362 . The labeled data was then fed as input to different candidate classiﬁers to identify the best performing algorithm. All ﬁve classi- ﬁers did reasonably well on the imbalanced dataset, although we found that the BERT-based classiﬁer performed much better than the four traditional classiﬁers, as shown in Table 1 . More detailed explanation on the performance metrics of the classiﬁers are given in Section 4 . 3.5. Applying classiﬁers After obtaining the trained and tested ‘CySecPriv’ and ‘Non- ExpertUser’ classiﬁers, we applied them sequentially to the pre- processed dataset of 13.7 million tweets to produce the actual dataset for further analysis. The ﬁnal dataset consists of 435,207 (3.17% of the total tweet dataset) CySecPriv tweets written by 337,604 non-expert users. Fig. 3 demonstrates the number of tweets after each step of the data curation and the number of au- thors after applying the classiﬁers. Due to the non-perfect accuracy of the classiﬁers, the dataset must also include a small portion of false positive samples and have missed some false negative samples. Taking this into consid- eration, later we will avoid results that can be affected by such false positives, e.g., for topical modeling results, any topics with a small number of tweets may be more affected by false positives so become less reliable. 3.6. Topic modeling Once we had the ﬁnal dataset, we investigated important top- ical areas that attracted non-expert users’ attention (RQ2 and RQ3). We tried two popular topic modeling algorithms for this purpose: latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) ( Blei et al., 2003 ) and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) ( Kuang et al., 2015 ), both having been widely used and NMF being reported to perform better in some tasks especially for processing shorter texts like tweets ( Chen et al., 2019 ). We found that LDA provided semanti- cally more interpretable results compare to NMF, while NMF was generally faster in processing the outputs. As the interpretability of the results is more important than speed for our purposes, we decided to use LDA as the topical modeling method. LDA requires the number of topics as an input parameter, so we needed a way to determine the best value of the number. We used Gensim 12 , a popular topic coherence model tool, to determine a relevant k while processing all topic modeling cases. In addition, an R pack- age pyLDAvis ( Sievert and Shirley, 2014 ) was used to visualize and interpret the results of LDA. The LDA algorithm was used to analyze topics in our ﬁnal datasets in three different ways: (1) tweets in all three years to- gether to get the overall picture, (2) tweets in each of the three 12 https://www.radimrehurek.com/gensim/ 6 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Fig. 3. The number of tweets after each step of the data curation process and the number of corresponding authors for the last two steps. different years separately to allow yearly trend analysis, and (3) 2019 and 2020 tweets combined vs the 2021 data to study any changes of topics before the global COVID-19 lockdowns and dur- ing the pandemic. 3.7. Sentiment analysis To address RQ4 and RQ5, we conducted sentiment analysis on the ﬁnal dataset. We experimented with two sentiment analysis algorithms, VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for Sentiment Rea- soning) analysis ( Hutto and Gilbert, 2014 ) that is a popular lexicon- based sentiment analysis library for Twitter-like datasets and ‘bert- base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment’ Town , a BERT-based senti- ment analysis algorithm implemented by the NLP Town 13 for the Hugging Face library. VADER classiﬁes an input text into three dif- ferent classes, i.e., ‘positive’, ‘negative’ and ‘neutral’, whereas the BERT-based algorithm produces a ﬁve-leveled sentiment score (be- tween -2 and 2), with -2 being totally negative and 2 totally pos- itive 14 . Results produced by the two algorithms are very different, so we decided to evaluate their performance against a manually constructed benchmark. To decide which sentiment analysis algorithm to use, we con- ducted a comparison between them using some ground truth la- bels for tweets with ‘positive’, ‘negative’ and ‘neutral’ sentiment. Such labels were produced by the ﬁrst author of the paper by man- ually inspecting 500 randomly selected samples, which were clas- siﬁed as totally positive (2), totally negative (-2) or neutral (0) by the BERT-based algorithm. The ground truth labels were compared with the outputs from both sentiment analysis algorithms to cal- culate an agreement rate, i.e., the percentage of the ground truth labels match the outputs of a given algorithm, as an accuracy met- ric. The results revealed that the BERT-based model achieved an agreement rate of 71%, 10% higher than VADER that achieved an agreement score of 61%. The results are aligned with results from past studies conducted by other researchers ( Crocamo et al., 2021; Nemes and Kiss, 2021 ). Therefore, we decided to use the BERT- based algorithm for our sentiment analysis experiments. 13 https://www.nlp.town/ 14 The algorithm originally returns a score between 1 and 5. We decided to shift the range by -3, so the range become [-2,2] and a negative/positive value means negative/positive sentiment, which we consider more interpretable. 3.8. Qualitative analysis In order to gather more insights about some of the important topics we observed from our earlier quantitative analysis we de- cided to conduct a qualitative analysis. Our methodology follows the four-phased approach proposed in ( Andreotta et al., 2019 ). We decided to qualitatively inspect randomly selected tweets belong- ings to six LDA topics, including 1) four cyber security-related topics that were frequently discussed in all three years – ‘VP- Nuse’, ‘DeviceAccSec’ and ‘WiﬁPass’, ’HomePrivSec’ and 2) two top- ics that appeared only in pre-Covid period (2019-20) or during pandemic period in 2021 – ‘External Stakeholders’ 2019/2020 for 2019-20 and ‘HelpRelated’ for 2021, as presented in Fig. 6 . We randomly extracted 500 tweets from each of the 5 selected top- ics. This led to in total 500 × 3 × 4 + 500 × 2 = 7 , 000 tweets for qualitative analysis. For the analysis itself, we followed the the- matic analysis method proposed in ( Braun et al., 2019 ). Important keywords from each topic were highlighted and assigned to dif- ferent codes ﬁrst. For example, a tweet on forgetting password was assigned to a code ‘password’ and a tweet on sharing a pass- word with a family member to ‘sharing behavior’. Eventually, these codes were compared and grouped into a number of coherent themes. For example, all Wi-Fi related codes such as ‘WiFi neigh- bour/family/friends’, ‘Wi-Fi awareness’, ‘Wi-Fi password’, ‘Wi-Fi De- vice’, ‘Wi-Fi Issue/solution/help’ were grouped in the theme ‘Wi-Fi related security’. 4. Results In this section, we report detailed results of our work, in- cluding detailed performance comparison results of the ‘CySecPriv’ and ‘NonExpertUser’ classiﬁers based on different machine learn- ing methods, and quantitative and qualitative analysis results after applying the BERT-based classiﬁers to our Twitter dataset. 4.1. Performance of ‘CySecPriv’ and ‘NonExpertUser’ Classiﬁers (RQ1) Identifying privacy and security related tweets posted by non- expert users was our ﬁrst research question. To that extent, we developed a classiﬁer to ﬁrst determine the cyber security na- ture of a tweet, and then a second classiﬁer to identify the au- thor as a non-expert user. The following paragraph explains the performance success of our classiﬁers. According to the results in Table 1 a, we can see that the BERT-based classiﬁer performed the best, so we decided to use it for our analysis. This classi- ﬁer achieved a precision score of 0.90, a recall score of 0.93 and 7 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Table 2 The yearly trend of CySecPriv tweets and non-expert (NE) authors of such tweets (2019–2021), showing a substantially increased level in 2021 (during the COVID-19 pandemic) compared with 2019 and 2020 (before the ﬁrst wave of global COVID-19 lockdowns), in both relevant tweets and non-expert authors involved. Year(s) #(Initial Processed Tweets) #(CySecPriv Tweets) #(NE CySecPriv Tweets) (%) 2019 4,690,397 274,279 90,539 (2.5%) 2020 4,439,719 284,006 110,881(2.5%) 2021 4,589,582 356,455 233,787 ( 5.09% ) 2019-21 13,719,698 914,740 435,207 (3.17%) (a) CySecPriv tweets posted by non-expert users Year(s) #(CySecPriv Authors) #(NE CySecPriv Authors) 2019 202,917 90,539 (45%) 2020 186,964 87,513 (47%) 2021 247,417 180,325 ( 73% ) 2019-21 560,272 337,604 (60%) (b) The number of non-expert authors an F1-score of 0.92, a reasonably high score to classify and la- bel our tweets. We compared our results to other similar stud- ies using BERT-based classiﬁers to evaluate our model. We noticed that, in general, BERT-based models achieved an F1-score between 0.83 and 0.95 ( Dionísio et al., 2019; Ghourabi, 2021; Husain and Uzuner, 2021; Kalepalli et al., 2020; Mozafari et al., 2020; Sriram et al., 2021 ). Similarly good performance results were observed for the ‘NonExpertUser’ classiﬁer. As shown in Table 1 b, the best- performing classiﬁer is also the BERT-based one, which achieved an F1-score of 0.94 when it is used to predict non-expert users (versus the other three classes). As mentioned in the previous section, after applying the two classiﬁers to the 13.7 million raw tweets, we obtained 435,207 tweets written by non-expert users. Among all the CySecPriv tweets authored by non-expert users, we noticed a sharp (more than doubled) increase both in the absolute number and the rela- tive percentage of CySecPriv tweets from 2019 and 2020 to 2021, as shown in Table 2 . If we look at the proportion of non-expert users in the total CySecPriv authorship, who posted at least one CySecPriv tweet, we can also see a similar increase from 2019 and 2020 to 2021, doubled in the absolute number and increased by 62.2% (vs 2019) and 55.3% (vs 2020) in the relative percentage. The increase during the COVID-19 pandemic (2021) may be attributed to the increased use of digital technologies at home due to the global lockdowns that led to more cyber security and privacy chal- lenges and concerns for non-expert users. 4.2. Non-expert users’ cyber security and privacy related discussions and trend analysis (RQ2 and RQ3) Having identiﬁed the relevant tweets, we explored the results using topic modeling to understand the types of discussions non- expert users were engaged in on Twitter. We examined the top- ics discussed both quantitatively and qualitatively. The quantitative analysis involved the entire curated dataset while the qualitative exploration considered a representative subset of data (see Sub- Section 3.8 ). In the following two sub-subsections, we discuss the results of both investigations, in greater detail. 4.2.1. Quantitative analysis Our LDA analysis investigated the datasets from the following three different angles: I analysis of the whole dataset, II analysis of data over time (yearly), and III comparison of data in the ﬁrst two years (January 2019 to February 2022, before the ﬁrst wave of global COVID-19 lock- downs) and during the pandemic (January and February of 2021). These separate analyses led to discovery of different patterns, e.g., the third analysis let us see how ‘Help-related’ tweets became a major topic of non-expert users’ online discussion on Twitter in 2021, much more so than before the COVID-19 pandemic. Similarly, the second analysis highlighted the trend in certain topics such as the continuous increasing use of ‘VPN-related’ queries over time, which may not be explained by the COVID-19 pandemic alone. Re- sults of all these analyses are discussed with greater details below and shown in Figs. 4 , 5 and 6 . (I) Analysis of the whole dataset: The results depicted in Fig. 4 demonstrate common discussion areas of non-expert Twitter users pertaining to cyber security and privacy. Interestingly and unexpectedly, the top topic turned out to be the use of VPNs (‘VPNuse’, 21%), which is followed by device account security (‘AcctPrivSec’, 13%), laptop security (‘LaptopSec’, 10%), Wi-Fi and password security (9.2%), and cyber security and privacy matters at home (‘HomePrivSec’, 8.6%). In addition, cyber security and privacy matters related to different computing devices is also an important cluster of topics: iPhone (‘iPhoneSec’, 8%), gen- eral devices (‘DevicePrivSec’, 7.3%), Android (‘AndroidPrivSec’, 6.3%) and mobile apps (‘AppPrivSec’, 6%). Considering the second most used topic ‘AcctPrivSec’ is also device-related, it may be the case that device-related discussions are even more common than those related to the top-most topic ‘VPNuse’. Note that the boundary be- tween different topics is not clear-cut, so there are often overlaps between different discussions, e.g., a tweet in our dataset about how to use an IP camera and access details through VPN could come either under ‘DevicePrivSec’ or ‘VPNUse’. (II) Analysis of data over the three years: Fig. 5 gives a compact view of the top topics calculated for each year along with the percentage of tweets in each topic. As in the case of the overall results, the top-most topic for all the three years remains ‘VPNuse’. Inspecting the overlaps between different topics quantitatively and qualitatively (see Section 4.2.2 for the latter), we observed that the ‘VPNuse’ topic overlaps heavily with other top- ics, indicating VPNs were used in many different contexts. For ex- ample, ‘VPN’ as a keyword was mentioned in 35% of tweets on the ‘HelpRelated’ topic in 2021 and 16% of the total tweets of the ‘Wiﬁ- Pass’ topic in 2020. While the topic distributions across the three individual years look similar, there are some noticeable differences. For instance, the percentage of the ‘WiﬁPass’ topic decreased from 10.4% in 2019 to 9.5% in 2021, substituted with broader discussions on new topics such as ‘HomePrivSec’ (3.6%), ‘InternetSec’ (2.2%) and ‘HelpRelated’ (2.7%). 8 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Fig. 4. Topics derived from the full dataset (2019-21). Fig. 5. Topic distribution for each of the three individual years (2019-2021). Fig. 6. Topic distributions in 2019-20 (before the ﬁrst wave of global COVID-19 lockdowns) and in 2021 (during the COVID-19 pandemic). (III) Comparison of tweets before and during the COVID-19 pan- demic: The topic modeling results presented in Fig. 6 show statistics of topics before the ﬁrst wave of global COVID-19 lockdowns (2019- 20) and during the pandemic (2021). It is evident from the ﬁg- ure that, several topics appeared to be common in both periods, e.g., ‘VPNuse‘, ‘LaptopSec’, ‘AccPrivSec’, ‘iPhoneSec’, and ‘WiﬁPass’, indicating that the nature of the frequently discussed topics be- fore and during COVID period have not changed much. However, we can also notice that, there are topics which are different, e.g., a number of new topic emerged during the pandemic period, includ- ing ‘HelpRelated’ (2.7%) containing tweets about peoples’ query, help or advice related tweets, and ‘ScamProtectThreat’ (8.8%) relat- ing to different types of scams and security threat people encoun- tered and ways to protect themselves. These may be attributed to more cyber security and privacy issues encountered by non- expert users due to an increased level of digital activities during the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a notable increase in the topic area of ‘VPNuse’ during the 2021 pandemic period, which sug- gests that non-expert users’ use of VPN may have increased during this period. Another major trend emerged is that non-expert users were concerned by and engaged with discussions of a wide range of topics, such as cyber security and privacy issues of both tra- ditional computing devices and ‘smarter’ devices, networking be- haviors and authentication techniques such as passwords, privacy enhancing techniques and tools such as VPNs, seeking help and support on different privacy and cyber security related topics, Wi- Fi-related topics, ﬁnancial security involving external stakeholders, cyber security speciﬁc to home, mobile device security and web browser security. Evidences of these discussions could be found in topics across the years. 4.2.2. Qualitative analysis As mentioned in Section 3 , we used thematic analysis to code the selected six topics for our qualitative analysis, which resulted in seven different themes and provided further insights into the topic categories. These details are discussed below. Although we collected topics generated by LDA, after manually going through 9 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 the data we observed several overlaps in the topics. For exam- ple, we had 500 records on help-related topics but after the the- matic analysis we found 1,852 tweets that could be assigned to the theme of ‘Help and support needed’ and otherwise were in either ‘AcctPrivSec’, ‘VPNuse’, ‘ExtStakeHolder’ or ’WiﬁPass’ in the LDA re- sults. Such overlap were envisaged due to the automatic nature of analysis done in LDA topic modeling. (I) Help and Support Needed: A number of queries and discus- sions (222 tweets, 12% of 1852 help-related ones) on laptops, desk- tops, tablets and routers involved cyber security problems about passwords and user authentication, where non-expert users ex- pressed their inability to cope with the requirements of multi- ple password changes and the use of OTPs (one-time passwords). Users sought help on virus-related problems, and their inability to distinguish between scams and genuine requests from legitimate parties sometime indicating people’s general awareness of scam messages, but also their lack of technical skills to recognize scams and consequently help themselves. There were a number of dis- cussion (333 tweets, 18% of 1,852) involving questions and advice related to Wi-Fi security especially about secure Wi-Fi in public places from a user perspective, and also seeking help on forgot- ten passwords, broken Wi-Fi security, how to stop neighbors from breaking into Wi-Fi, handling security notiﬁcations, etc. Cyber se- curity related questions regarding web browsers on PCs were an- other major area of discussions, often about seeking advice on how to clear caches and cookies, how to deal with adware and how to use private browsing. VPN-related questions covered a big portion (482 tweets, 26% of 1,852) involving questions on downloading and setting up VPNs, different operational problems, seeking help on what type of VPNs to install, etc. (II) Awareness on Password Protection: User authentication, and passwords particularly, have been prominent topics of cyber se- curity related discussion for a long time ( Zimmermann and Ger- ber, 2020 ). 11% of the total data we analyzed (826 of 7,0 0 0) were password-related discussions. For the tweets we analyzed in this study, we noticed that only a very small number of tweets (32, 3.9% of 826) referred to modern authentication schemes based on biometrics or multi-factor authentication (MFA). Wi-Fi security is a major topic (490 tweets, 60% of 826), where non-expert users expressed the risks associated with leaked Wi-Fi passwords and their worry or fear of such passwords being compromised. Pass- word managers (PMs) appeared to be a popular sub-topic as well. Tweets on PMs covered both positive and negative aspects, cover- ing areas such as browser-based PMs or dedicated software tools, advice on the best PMs, open-source and commercial PMs, selec- tive use of PMs, and how to use PMs. A very small number of tweets (16, 1.9% of 826) advised using PMs as a good cyber se- curity habit or voiced doubts on their usefulness. Tweets involving general passwords were mainly about how users were frustrated to remember diﬃcult passwords, unable to cope with managing passwords for multiple devices or expressed distrust of stakehold- ers who manage PMs. In line with the discussions in some recent studies ( Zimmermann and Gerber, 2020 ), we noticed that, non- expert users in general were not enthusiastic about more modern authentication methods such as MFA, which may be attributed to the substantial efforts needed for setting things up, compared to the simplicity of using more traditional knowledge-based methods such as textual passwords. (III) Wi-Fi related security: 1852 (26% of 7,0 0 0) tweets asked for help and advice on locating Wi-Fi access points, (re)conﬁguring Wi-Fi settings, connecting and disconnecting different devices to and from Wi-Fi access points, and cyber security issues of Wi- Fi routers (e.g., compromised routers). Some tweets under this theme discussed ways of hacking into neighbors’ Wi-Fi (e.g., for using neighbors’ Wi-Fi illegally to watch paid TV programs) and how to protect themselves from this kind of attacks. Another as- pect discussed under this topic is the behavior of some non-expert users in sharing their Wi-Fi passwords with trusted people such as guests, friends and roommates, without any heed to potential security problems. Granting important user credentials to trusted people may seem harmless, and it is one of the usual way of shar- ing Wi-Fi access points at home, but it can potentially open up possibilities of insecure storage, extension of admin privileges (un- less a separate guest account is used). Some interesting tweets in our set talked about how people took photographs of wi-Fi creden- tials wherever they visited and their phone was full of these de- tails from friends and families. Overall, it seemed that while some non-expert users had some understanding of cyber security issues involving the use of Wi-Fi, many of them had either a low level of awareness or were unsure of how to protect themselves from po- tential cyber security problems. Setting up an auto-connect, time- limited guest account could solve this problem but unfortunately not all Wi-Fi provider offers this choice and if on offer, they are quite complicated to follow up. (IV) Privacy: Privacy as a topic was discussed by a number of (2,206, 32% of 7,0 0 0) non-expert users. Privacy concerns around smart home devices, such as Amazon Echo, Google Nest, smart locks, smartwatches, smartphones and smart TVs, are one of the main reasons behind privacy-related discussions, with a major- ity of (1,876, 85% of 2,206) all tweets were attributed to discus- sions related to these areas. Users expressed their mistrust, frus- tration and awareness or unawareness about data collection, stor- age and transfer to third parties from these devices. Keywords such as ‘scared’, ‘panic’, ‘trust’ and ‘annoy’ made a regular appearance within these tweets. On a positive side, users also discussed or ad- vised others on how to improve privacy of these devices. A num- ber of (318, 14% of 2,206) tweets were related to possible data breaches, trust in data collectors, data leaking, data theft, secure data storage and transfer. Webcams and laptop privacy also caught many users’ attention, with some of them discussing about privacy ﬁlters for laptops and webcam privacy covers. Several tweets men- tioned or asked about how VPNs could help enhance privacy and whether it is worth using it for that purpose. (V) External stakeholders: This was an interesting topic cover- ing a wide range of discussions. Such tweets referred to different stakeholders who are in some way responsible for cyber security and privacy of users. The stakeholders mentioned include govern- ments, companies and other third parties who were not part of the non-expert users’ operational environments but impacted the way their cyber security and privacy related issues were generated and handled. The activities and impacts of governmental bodies are one of the frequently discussed sub-topics. These include govern- mental apps snooping on phones and devices, diminishing trust of users on governments handling of their personal data, outdated se- curity certiﬁcates on governmental websites, and also low-quality information on governmental websites such as mis-spelling ‘Smart meters’ as ‘Spy meters’. Many users were very vocal about compa- nies not caring about their privacy and data security, tracking user devices to collect personal data covertly, and even pre-installing spyware on user devices. (VI) Smartphones and other smart devices: A lot of discussions (1,876, 26% of 7,0 0 0) in our samples were related to iPhone and Android smartphones and other smart devices. Many discussions focused on Android’s lack of security (e.g., such devices being vulnerable to malware or spyware), and ways to protect against such security problems. Although many posts were positive about iPhone security, others placed their mistrust in a growing level of security mishaps and vulnerabilities in iPhone. Location tracking using the phone was also discussed sometimes as a good feature for locating lost phones but was also labeled as a harmful feature. Smart speakers such as Amazon Alexa are one of the frequently mentioned smart devices under this topic, and tweets were on dis- 10 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Fig. 7. Sentiment analysis results for each of the three years (2019-21). cussions of data privacy, security updates, third party involvement in data sharing, and following appropriate security behaviors while using smart speakers. (VII) VPN related discussion: As mentioned in Section 4.2.1 , VPN was the most discussed topic as shown in the quantitative anal- ysis, so it was not surprising that we encountered many tweets (2,006, 29% of 7,000) under this topic in our qualitative analysis. Most discussions on VPNs revolved around people trying to get help to download, install, or conﬁgure VPNs at home. Various op- erational issues and general advice on type of VPNs to use or pur- chase, need of VPNs in different scenarios and the use of VPNs for watching and streaming different programs to avoid privacy issues were also quite popular. The use of VPNs to avoid or override local restrictions on speciﬁc data or resource use was a popular topic, too. Many of these tweets (489, 24% of 2,006) advised on the what, how and why’s of VPNs, responded to work-related queries, and some also expressed distrust of VPNs. 4.3. Sentiment analysis of non-expert users’ discussions on cyber security and privacy and trend analysis (RQ4 and RQ5) Having identiﬁed the topical areas non-expert users were in- terested, we investigated their sentiment with relation to these topics. As mentioned in Section 3 , we used an off-the-shelf BERT- based sentiment analysis classiﬁer for this purpose. We exam- ined each of the topics individually to understand the underly- ing sentiment tones of users, which turned out to be overwhelm- ingly negative for all topics, as depicted in Fig. 7 (data normal- ized to be presented as percentage) and negative in general across the three years. Some topics have a relatively higher percentage of tweets with a ‘strongly positive’ score, e.g., tweets belonging to the topics ‘VPNuse’ and ‘HomePrivSec’. By manually inspect- ing some tweets under these topics, we noticed that many tweets are about suggesting devices or apps that users felt happy about, and some are about users expressing appreciation on being able to understand the workings of a technology or to remember their forgotten passwords. Two example topics tweets with a nega- tive sentiment talked about are Wi-Fi access points being hacked by neighbors and vulnerabilities of PMs. Two topics, ‘InternetSec’ and ‘LaptopSec’, have the higher percentage (over 70% across all three years) of tweets with a ‘strongly negative’ score. Our results showed a sharp contrast to the results reported in ( Sriram et al., 2021 ), which studied Twitter data to determine users’ sentiment towards IoT in general and found the users sentiments to be more positive towards cyber security and privacy. 5. Further discussions, limitations and future work To summarize the results reported in the previous section, the good performance of the two classiﬁers enabled us to extract a large number of cyber security and privacy-related tweets posted by non-expert users in three consecutive years (January and Febru- ary of 2019-21). Topical modeling analysis of the extracted tweets led to insights about a wide range of topics non-expert users were discussing before the global COVID-19 lockdowns and during the pandemic. The biggest topic is about the use of VPNs, which was unexpected because the topic has not been extensively studied in the research literature (more details are given below). Comparing topics in 2019-20 and 2021, we noticed a substantial increase in non-expert users’ discussions on many topics including VPN, lap- tops, mobile phones, and device accounts. Sentiment analysis of the extracted tweets led to the discovery of an overall and consis- tent negative sentiment for all topics across all three years. How- ever, we found that non-expert users’ opinions seemed to have be- come more polarized during the COVID-19 pandemic (2021), i.e., the neutral sentiment became much thinner compared with before the global lockdowns (2019-20). Another noticeable pattern we ob- served is that most discussions of non-expert users were about traditional computing devices such as laptops, tablets, and smart- phones rather than smart home devices, suggesting that over- focusing on cyber security and privacy of smart home devices may miss the likely fact that traditional computing devices re- main the center of home networking at most households. 5.1. Need of research on non-technical aspects of the use of VPNs The fact that VPN-related discussions form the biggest topic in our data can be related to the reported increased usage of VPNs, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic ( Johnson, 2021b ). Among all such discussions about VPNs, typical sub-topics include privacy, malware, the legality of use, bypassing geolocation control (based on IP addresses), hardware- and software-based VPNs, and work- based tweets. The extensive discussions on VPNs are aligned with the results reported in ( Busse et al., 2019 ), which reported that VPNs are often mentioned in cyber security and privacy advice and among general practices of non-expert users. Despite the impor- tance of VPNs, current research on VPNs is more about technical aspects, and human factors are much less studied. Studies that did venture into human factors of VPNs focused on limited areas such as the information disclosed while using VPNs ( Molina et al., 2019 ), user awareness of VPN ( Jayatilleke and Pathirana, 2018; Karaymeh et al., 2019 ), and user attitudes towards adopting VPNs ( Namara et al., 2020; Sombatruang et al., 2020 ) (note that ( Namara et al., 2020 ) focused mainly on expert users). We believe more research is needed to study a wide range of aspects regarding the use of VPNs by non-expert users, especially in complicated contexts such as working from home, bringing own devices to work, and other hybrids (e.g., work-life, multi-user and multi-device) envi- ronments . 11 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 5.2. Meeting the cyber security help needs of non-expert users Another noticeable phenomenon we observed is that many dis- cussions of non-expert users, either about traditional computing devices, smart devices, or other digital platforms and tools, were often about seeking help and advice and expressing frustration about cyber security and privacy. Such discussions formed one of the topics in 2021 (during the COVID-19 pandemic), indicating that working and studying from home led to an increased level of cyber security and privacy concerns and problems. Many of these tweets, have negative sentiment, suggesting that non-expert users largely struggled with getting their problems solved without help. Accord- ing to our analysis, non-expert users often referred to Google for support on cyber security and privacy problems, however, as re- ported in a recent study ( Turner et al., 2021 ), googling often did not work appropriately for getting such advice. We call for more research on understanding diﬃculties non-expert users are fac- ing with getting the help they need and on better methods for providing such help . 5.3. Cyber security and privacy related issues from the connected home networking ecosystem with multiple devices and multiple users A third key ﬁnding of our study is about non-expert users’ dis- cussions on their usage of multiple devices and their interactions with multiple other users in the home context. Some discussions on multiple devices are less surprising, e.g., interactions between mobile phones and smart devices, but some others were less ex- pected, e.g., security issues of Bluetooth pairing between different computing devices. Regarding multi-user aspects, we noticed dis- cussions that pointed to scenarios where cyber security and pri- vacy issues were caused by or related to the presence of multiple users at home. Example scenarios include non-expert users shar- ing their Wi-Fi access points and password details with secondary and temporary users such as house guests and friends, and some users discussing how to illegally break into neighbors’ Wi-Fi ac- cess points. Past studies on such multi-user aspects we are aware of ( Ahmad et al., 2020; Bernd et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020b; Marky et al., 2020 ) were all smaller-scale empirical studies. One possible future research direction on multi-user and multi-device scenarios is to investigate how personal and sensitive data ﬂow between different computing devices and possible users. The subject of personal and/or sensitive data is an important topic not only because it is an element in understanding and maintaining the privacy of data, but also because the sensitivity of the personal data alters depending on the context it is used, the source it is derived from and the stakeholder which uses it and evolve with time ( Saglam et al., 2022 ). A detailed study of these areas can help understand user behaviors and identify new interventions. 5.4. Limitations Our study demonstrated that using real-world data from OSN platforms can offer a much richer dataset and cover a wider range of topics discussed by people in the wild than empirical studies based on a smaller number of participants in settings such as sur- veys, interviews, and focus groups. However, using online social media analysis along also has its own limitations, e.g., it is more passive and depends on what people discussed online. There could be more issues at play in the real world that would not be cap- tured through online postings. It is also diﬃcult to study more speciﬁed topics or speciﬁc interventions when studying the sheer volume of data. The diversity of the data also means there can be too many factors affecting the results, so it can be diﬃcult to con- duct causal analysis. As a result, we believe that mixed methods, which combine both larger-scale OSN analysis and smaller-scale empirical studies, will be more appropriate for studying user per- spectives on cyber security and privacy. For instance, as suggested in ( Joseph et al., 2021 ), the larger set of macro results obtained via an OSN analysis study could be followed by complementary em- pirical studies that focus on more speciﬁc aspects revealed by the OSN analysis. Secondly, we have used the months of January and February of each year to conduct this study, which might not be representative enough of the whole year. In future studies, we would endeavor to include a more representative set of data to give us more informa- tive results and coverage. Last but not the least, we would like to point out that our study is heavily based on the two machine learning classiﬁers and the automated analysis tools for topical modeling and sentiment anal- ysis. Such tools are not perfect and can produce both false positives and false negatives, and the high volume of data made a manual inspection of results infeasible, so we relied on a limited level of qualitative analysis. The manual labeling process we did could also suffer from subjectivity, since we had to rely on some subjective judgments when applying pre-deﬁned criteria to label the data. The keywords we used to extract the original 13.7 million tweets may not be representative enough, so we may have missed some relevant tweets. All such problems are common for all online so- cial media analysis studies, which further justiﬁes the need to have some follow-up smaller-scale empirical studies to validate and ex- tend the ﬁndings reported in our study. 6. Conclusion Using a large-scale Twitter dataset in January and February in three consecutive years (2019-21) and two BERT-based classiﬁers to automatically detect cyber security and privacy-related tweets posted by non-expert users, this paper reports interesting results about non-expert users’ discussions on cyber security and privacy, via topic modeling and sentiment analysis. Past studies have used classiﬁers to ﬁlter cyber security related tweets, but this study focused on cyber security and privacy related tweets posted by non-expert users and investigated the identiﬁed tweets both qual- itatively and quantitatively. Our analysis comprehensively covers three different perspectives, i.e., overall analysis across the three years covered, yearly analysis, and a comparative analysis of tweets posted before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. We observed that non-expert users discussed a wide range of topics, covering many different types of computing devices, with more discussions on more traditional computing devices than smart ones. The results also showed noticeable changes in non- expert users’ discussions on cyber security and privacy before the global COVID-19 lockdowns (2019-20) and during the pandemic (2021), e.g., an increased level of more polarized sentiment in 2021, a focus on help-related tweets relating to cyber security and privacy, and the increased use of speciﬁc cyber security tools such as VPNs. The study endeavours to inform researchers about various topics for future research, e.g., more research on the use of VPNs by non-expert users, helping non-expert users on cyber security and privacy, and cyber security and privacy issues arising from the use of multiple devices in the home without ignoring traditional devices, and cyber security and privacy risks related to different roles and interactions of multiple users of a home network. These topics should be studied via more data-driven research and also more diverse empirical studies. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. 12 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 CRediT authorship contribution statement Nandita Pattnaik: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Shujun Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Jason R.C. Nurse: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writ- ing – review & editing. Data Availability Data will be made available on request. Supplementary material Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2022.103008 . References Aduragba, O.T., Yu, J., Senthilnathan, G., Crsitea, A., 2020. Sentence contextual en- coder with BERT and BiLSTM for automatic classiﬁcation with imbalanced med- ication tweets. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Social Media Mining for Health Ap- plications Workshop & Shared Task. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 165–167 . https://www.aclanthology.org/2020.smm4h-1.31 . Aghasian, E., Garg, S., Montgomery, J., 2020. An automated model to score the pri- vacy of unstructured information–social media case. Computers & Security 92, 101778:1–101778:10. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.101778 . Ahmad, I., Farzan, R., Kapadia, A., Lee, A.J., 2020. Tangible privacy: towards user- centric sensor designs for bystander privacy. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4 (CSCW2), 116:1–116:28. doi: 10.1145/3415187 . Alodhyani, F., Theodorakopoulos, G., Reinecke, P., 2020. Password managers—it’s all about trust and transparency. Future Internet 12 (11), 189:1–189:50. doi: 10. 3390/ﬁ12110189 . Alsop, T., 2021. Connected devices used to access Wi-Fi at home 2020. https://www.statista.com/statistics/387709/connected- devices- used- to- access- wireless- internet- at- home- uk/ . Alves, F., Bettini, A., Ferreira, P.M., Bessani, A., 2021. Processing tweets for cyberse- curity threat awareness. Inf Syst 95, 101586:1–101586:18. doi: 10.1016/j.is.2020. 101586 . Andreotta, M., Nugroho, R., Hurlstone, M.J., Boschetti, F., Farrell, S., Walker, I., Paris, C., 2019. Analyzing social media data: a mixed-methods framework com- bining computational and qualitative text analysis. Behav Res Methods 51 (4), 1766–1781. doi: 10.3758/s13428- 019- 01202- 8 . Barbosa, N.M., Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., 2020. Do privacy and security matter to every- one? quantifying and clustering user-centric considerations about smart home device adoption. In: Proceedings of 16th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX Association, pp. 417–435 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/ soups2020/presentation/barbosa . BBC, 2020. Coronavirus: The world in lockdown in maps and charts News. https: //www.bbc.com/news/world-52103747 . Bernd, J., Abu-Salma, R., Frik, A., 2020. Bystanders’ privacy: The perspectives of nan- nies on smart home surveillance. In: Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Workshop on Free and Open Communications on the Internet. USENIX Association, pp. 1– 14 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/foci20/presentation/bernd . Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I., 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma- chine Learning Research 3, 993–1022 . https://jmlr.org/papers/volume3/blei03a/ blei03a.pdf . Braun, V., Clarke, V., Hayﬁeld, N., Terry, G., 2019. Thematic analysis. In: Handbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences. Springer, pp. 843–860. doi: 10.1007/ 978- 981- 10- 5251- 4 _ 103 . Busse, K., Schöfer, J., Smith, M., 2019. Replication: No one can hack my mind revis- iting a study on expert and non-expert security practices and advice. In: Pro- ceedings of the 15th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX Associ- ation, pp. 117–136 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2019/presentation/ busse . Caliskan Islam, A., Walsh, J., Greenstadt, R., 2014. Privacy detective: Detecting pri- vate information and collective privacy behavior in a large social network. In: Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society. ACM, pp. 35–46. doi: 10.1145/2665943.2665958 . Camargo, J.E., Torres, C.A., Martínez, O.H., Gómez, F.A., 2016. A big data analyt- ics system to analyze citizens’ perception of security. In: Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference. IEEE, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/ISC2. 2016.7580846 . Camp, L.J., 2009. Mental models of privacy and security. IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag. 28 (3), 37–46. doi: 10.1109/MTS.2009.934142 . Camp, L. J., Asgharpour, F., Liu, D., 2008. Experimental evaluations of expert and non-expert computer users’ mental models of security risks. Project document. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228671400 _ Experimental _ Evaluations _ of _ Expert _ and _ Non-expert _ Computer _ Users%27 _ Mental _ Models _ of _ Security _ Risks . Cannizzaro, S., Procter, R., Ma, S., Maple, C., 2020. Trust in the smart home: ﬁndings from a nationally representative survey in the UK. PLoS ONE 15 (5), e0231615:1– e0231615:30. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231615 . Chalhoub, G., Flechais, I., 2020. “Alexa, are you spying on me?”: Exploring the ef- fect of user experience on the security and privacy of smart speaker users. In: HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust: Second International Conference, HCI- CPT 2020, Held as Part of the 22nd HCI International Conference, HCII 2020, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 19–24, 2020, Proceedings. Springer, pp. 305–325. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 50309- 3 _ 21 . Chaparro, L., Pulido, C., Rudas, J., Reyes, A., Victorino, J., Narvaez, L., Gomez, F., Mar- tinez, D., 2020. Sentiment analysis of social network content to characterize the perception of security. In: Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/ACM International Con- ference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining. ACM, pp. 685–691. doi: 10.1109/ASONAM49781.2020.9381434 . Chen, Y., Zhang, H., Liu, R., Ye, Z., Lin, J., 2019. Experimental explorations on short text topic mining between LDA and NMF based schemes. Knowl Based Syst 163, 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2018.08.011 . Crocamo, C., Viviani, M., Famiglini, L., Bartoli, F., Pasi, G., Carrà, G., 2021. Surveilling COVID-19 emotional contagion on Twitter by sentiment analysis. European Psy- chiatry 64 (1), e17:1–e17:6. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.3 . Das, S., Wang, B., Kim, A., Camp, L.J., 2020. MFA is a necessary chore!: exploring user mental models of multi-factor authentication technologies. In: Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. University of Hawai’i at Manoa, pp. 5441–5450 . Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2018. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL]. 10.48550/arXiv.1810.04805. Dionísio, N., Alves, F., Ferreira, P. M., Bessani, A., 2019. Cyberthreat detec- tion from Twitter using deep neural networks. arXiv: 1904.01127 [cs.LG]. 10.48550/arXiv.1904.01127. D’Sa, A.G., Illina, I., Fohr, D., 2020. BERT and fastText embeddings for automatic detection of toxic speech. In: Proceedings of the 2020 International Multi- Conference on Organization of Knowledge and Advanced Technologies. IEEE, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/OCTA49274.2020.9151853 . Face, H.,. Hugging Face – the AI community building the future. https://www. huggingface.co/ . Gai, A., Azam, S., Shanmugam, B., Jonkman, M., De Boer, F., 2018. Categorisation of security threats for smart home appliances. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Interna- tional Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics. IEEE, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/ICCCI.2018.8441213 . Ghourabi, A., 2021. SM-Detector: a security model based on BERT to detect SMishing messages in mobile environments. Concurr Comput 33 (24), e6452:1–e6452:15. doi: 10.1002/cpe.6452 . GmbH, E.,. spaCy 101: Everything you need to know spaCy usage documentation. https://spacy.io/usage/spacy-101 . Google, 2022. Classify text with BERT. https://www.tensorﬂow.org/text/tutorials/ classify _ text _ with _ bert . Greco, F., Polli, A., 2021. Security perception and people well-being. Soc Indic Res 153 (2), 741–758. doi: 10.1007/s11205- 020- 02341- 8 . Hao, Y., Dong, L., Wei, F., Xu, K., 2019. Visualizing and understanding the effec- tiveness of BERT. arXiv:1908.05620v1 [cs.CL]. 1908.05620v1. https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.1908.05620 . Hasegawa, A .A ., Yamashita, N., Mori, T., Inoue, D., Akiyama, M., 2022. Under- standing Non-Experts’ security- and Privacy-Related questions on a Q&A site. In: Proceedings of the 18th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX, pp. 39–56 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2022/ presentation/hasegawa . Hofstätter, S., Lipani, A., Zlabinger, M., Hanbury, A., 2020. Learning to re-rank with contextualized stopwords. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. ACM, pp. 2057–2060. doi: 10.1145/3340531.3412079 . Huang, D.Y., Apthorpe, N., Li, F., Acar, G., Feamster, N., 2020. IoT Inspector: crowd- sourcing labeled network traﬃc from smart home devices at scale. Proc ACM Interact Mob Wearable Ubiquitous Technol 4 (2), 46:1–46:21. doi: 10.1145/ 3397333 . Huang, Y., Obada-Obieh, B., Beznosov, K.K., 2020. Amazon vs. my brother: how users of shared smart speakers perceive and cope with privacy risks. In: Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 1–13 . Husain, F., Uzuner, O., 2021. Fine-tuning approach for Arabic offensive language detection system: BERT-based model. In: FTI Proceedings: 4th International Conference on Computer Applications and Information Security. FTI, pp. 1–5 . https://www.storage.googleapis.com/production-ipage-v1-0-1/981/556981/qPjjj fVx/2052bf7b80e84ceabd4db4f47be1cf0a?ﬁleName=Paper- no- 02- Fatemah%20 Husain.pdf . Hutto, C., Gilbert, E., 2014. VADER: a parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of social media text. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 8 (1), 216–225 . https://www.ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ ICWSM/article/view/14550 . Ion, I., Reeder, R., Consolvo, S., 2015. “... No one can hack my mind”: comparing expert and non-expert security practices. In: Proceedings of the 11th Sympo- sium On Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX Association, pp. 327–346 . https: //www.usenix.org/conference/soups2015/proceedings/presentation/ion . Jayatilleke, A., Pathirana, P., 2018. Smartphone VPN app usage and user awareness among Facebook users. In: Proceedings of the 2018 National Information Tech- nology Conference. IEEE, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/NITC.2018.8550081 . 13 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Johnson, J., 2021a. Share of online adults worldwide who can identify key cyber- security terms as of 2020. https://www-statista-com.chain.kent.ac.uk/statistics/ 1147391/online- adults- identify- cybersecurity- terms/ . Johnson, J., 2021b. VPN usage surge during coronavirus crisis 2020. https://www. statista.com/statistics/1106137/vpn- usage- coronavirus/ . Johnson, J., 2022a. Devices used to access the internet 2021. https://www.statista. com/statistics/1289755/internet- access- by- device- worldwide/ . Johnson, J., 2022b. Global internet penetration rate as of January 2022, by region. https://www.statista.com/statistics/269329/penetration-rate-of-the- internet-by-region/ . Jones, K.S., Lodinger, N.R., Widlus, B.P., Namin, A.S., Hewett, R., 2021. Do warn- ing message design recommendations address why non-experts do not protect themselves from cybersecurity threats? a review. Int J Hum Comput Interact 37 (18), 1709–1719. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2021.1908691 . Joseph, K., Shugars, S., Gallagher, R., Green, J., Mathé, A.Q., An, Z., Lazer, D., 2021. (Mis)alignment between stance expressed in social media data and public opin- ion surveys. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. ACL, pp. 312–324 . Kalepalli, Y., Tasneem, S., Phani Teja, P.D., Manne, S., 2020. Effective com parison of LDA with LSA for topic modelling. In: Proceedings of the 2020 4th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems. IEEE, pp. 1245–1250. doi: 10.1109/ICICCS48265.2020.9120888 . Kang, R., Dabbish, L., Fruchter, N., Kiesler, S., 2015. “My data just goes everywhere:” user mental models of the internet and implications for privacy and security. In: Proceedings of the 2015 USENIX Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX Association, pp. 39–52 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2015/ proceedings/presentation/kang . Karaymeh, A., Ababneh, M., Qasaimeh, M., Al-Fayoumi, M., 2019. Enhancing data protection provided by VPN connections over open WiFi networks. In: Proceed- ings of the 2019 2nd International Conference on New Trends in Computing Sciences. IEEE doi: 10.1109/ICTCS.2019.8923104 . Khazaei, T., Xiao, L., Mercer, R.E., Khan, A., 2018. Understanding privacy dichotomy in Twitter. In: Proceedings of the 29th on Hypertext and Social Media. ACM, pp. 156–164. doi: 10.1145/3209542.3209564 . Kowalczuk, P., 2018. Consumer acceptance of smart speakers: a mixed methods ap- proach. J Res Interact Mark 12 (4), 418–431. doi: 10.1108/JRIM- 01- 2018- 0022 . Kuang, D., Choo, J., Park, H., 2015. Nonnegative matrix factorization for interactive topic modeling and document clustering. In: Partitional Clustering Algorithms. Springer, pp. 215–243. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 09259- 1 _ 7 . Laricchia, F., 2022. Average number of connected devices in UK households 2020. https://www.statista.com/statistics/1107269/average- number- connected- devices- uk- house/ . sckit learn,. 1. supervised learning. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/supervised _ learning.html . Madabushi, H. T., Kochkina, E., Castelle, M., 2020. Cost-sensitive BERT for generalis- able sentence classiﬁcation with imbalanced data. 2003.11563. http://arxiv.org/ abs/2003.11563 . Mahaini, M.I., Li, S., Saglam, R.B., 2019. Building taxonomies based on human– machine teaming: cyber security as an example. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. ACM, pp. 30:1–30:9 . Marky, K., Voit, A., Stöver, A., Kunze, K., Schröder, S., Mühlhäuser, M., 2020. “I don’t know how to protect myself”: understanding privacy perceptions resulting from the presence of bystanders in smart environments. In: Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society. ACM, pp. 1–11 . Mittal, S., Das, P.K., Mulwad, V., Joshi, A., Finin, T., 2016. CyberTwitter: Using Twitter to generate alerts for cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities. In: Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining. IEEE, pp. 860–867. doi: 10.1109/ASONAM.2016.7752338 . Molina, M.D., Gambino, A., Sundar, S.S., 2019. Online privacy in public places: How do location, terms and conditions and VPN inﬂuence disclosure? In: Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1145/3290607.3312932 . Mozafari, M., Farahbakhsh, R., Crespi, N., 2020. A BERT-based transfer learning ap- proach for hate speech detection in online social media. In: Complex Networks and Their Applications VIII: Volume 1 Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Complex Networks and Their Applications COMPLEX NETWORKS 2019. Springer, pp. 928–940. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 36687- 2 _ 77 . Namara, M., Wilkinson, D., Caine, K., Knijnenburg, B.P., 2020. Emotional and practical considerations towards the adoption and abandonment of VPNs as a privacy- enhancing technology. Proc Priv Enh Technol 2020 (1), 83–102. doi: 10.2478/ popets- 2020- 0 0 06 . Nemes, L., Kiss, A., 2021. Prediction of stock values changes using sentiment analysis of stock news headlines. J Telecommun Inf Technol 5 (3), 375–394. doi: 10.1080/ 24751839.2021.1874252 . Oak, R., Du, M., Yan, D., Takawale, H., Amit, I., 2019. Malware detection on highly imbalanced data through sequence modeling. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security. ACM, pp. 37–48. doi: 10.1145/ 3338501.3357374 . O’Dea, S., 2021. Home devices used to online UK 2020. https://www.statista.com/ statistics/612951/home- devices- used- to- go- online- uk/ . Rahman, T., Rohan, R., Pal, D., Kanthamanon, P., 2021. Human factors in cybersecu- rity: a scoping review. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Advances in Information Technology. ACM, pp. 1–11 . Sabanoglu, T., 2021. Total monthly sales value of all retailing including automotive fuel in Great Britain from January 2017 to December 2021. https://www.statista. com/statistics/287867/retail- sales- total- value- monthly- great- britain- gb/ . Saglam, R.B., Nurse, J.R.C., Hodges, D., 2022. Personal information: perceptions, types and evolution. J Inf Secur Appl 66, 103163. doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2022.103163 . Salesforce, 2021. 2021 ecommerce stats and trends report. https://www1.salecycle. com/l/22702/2021- 04- 01/77jbfv . Saura, J.R., Palacios-Marqués, D., Ribeiro-Soriano, D., 2021. Using data mining tech- niques to explore security issues in smart living environments in Twitter. Com- put Commun 179, 285–295. doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2021.08.021 . Sethy, A., Ramabhadran, B., 2008. Bag-of-word normalized n-gram models. In: Pro- ceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communica- tion Association. ISCA, pp. 1594–1597 . https://www.isca-speech.org/archive _ v0/ archive _ papers/interspeech _ 2008/i08 _ 1594.pdf . Shah, N., 2022. Description of the emot:3.1 library. https://www.github.com/ NeelShah18/emot . Sharma, B., Karunanayake, I., Masood, R., Ikram, M., 2022. Analysing security and privacy threats in the lockdown periods of COVID-19 pandemic: Twitter dataset case study. arXiv:2202.10543 [cs]. 2202.10543. http://www.arxiv.org/abs/2202. 10543 . Sievert, C., Shirley, K., 2014. LDAvis: a method for visualizing and interpreting topics. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visu- alization, and Interfaces. ACL, pp. 63–70. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-3110 . Sombatruang, N., Omiya, T., Miyamoto, D., Sasse, M.A., Kadobayashi, Y., Baddeley, M., 2020. Attributes affecting user decision to adopt a virtual private network (VPN) app. In: Information and Communications Security: 22nd International Con- ference, ICICS 2020, Copenhagen, Denmark, August 24–26, 2020, Proceedings. Springer, pp. 223–242. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 61078- 4 _ 13 . Sriram, A., Li, Y., Hadaegh, A., 2021. Mining social media to understand user opinions on IoT security and privacy. In: Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE In- ternational Conference on Smart Computing. IEEE, pp. 252–257. doi: 10.1109/ SMARTCOMP52413.2021.0 0 056 . Sturgess, J., Nurse, J.R.C., Zhao, J., 2018. A capability-oriented approach to assessing privacy risk in smart home ecosystems. Living in the Internet of Things: Cyber- security of the IoT-2018. IET doi: 10.1049/cp.2018.0037 . Town, N.,. nlptown/bert-base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment Hugging Face. https: //www.huggingface.co/nlptown/bert- base- multilingual- uncased- sentiment . Turner, S., Nurse, J.R.C., Li, S., 2021. When googling it doesn’t work: the challenge of ﬁnding security advice for smart home devices. In: Human Aspects of Infor- mation Security and Assurance: 15th IFIP WG 11.12 International Symposium, HAISA 2021, Virtual Event, July 7–9, 2021, Proceedings. Springer, pp. 115–126 . Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017). Curran Asso- ciates, Inc., pp. 5998–6008 . https://www.proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/ hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html . Wash, R., 2010. Folk models of home computer security. In: Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. ACM, pp. 1–16. doi: 10.1145/1837110. 1837125 . Wolf, F., Kuber, R., Aviv, A.J., 2019. “Pretty close to a must-have”: balancing us- ability desire and security concern in biometric adoption. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 151:1–151:12 . Wu, J., Zappala, D., 2018. When is a tree really a truck? exploring mental models of encryption. In: Proceedings of the 14th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX Association, pp. 395–409 . https://www.usenix.org/conference/ soups2018/presentation/wu . Yin, S., Kaynak, O., 2015. Big data for modern industry: challenges and trends [point of view]. Proc IEEE 103 (2), 143–146. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2388958 . Zheng, S., Apthorpe, N., Chetty, M., Feamster, N., 2018. User perceptions of smart home IoT privacy. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2 (CSCW), 20 0:1–20 0:20. doi: 10.1145/3274469 . Zimmermann, V., Gerber, N., 2020. The password is dead, long live the password – a laboratory study on user perceptions of authentication schemes. Int J Hum Comput Stud 133, 26–44. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.08.006 . Zimmermann, V., Gerber, P., Marky, K., Böck, L., Kirchbuchner, F., 2019. Assessing users’ privacy and security concerns of smart home technologies. i-com 18 (3), 197–216. doi: 10.1515/icom- 2019- 0015 . Zubiaga, A., Procter, R., Maple, C., 2018. A longitudinal analysis of the public percep- tion of the opportunities and challenges of the internet of things. PLoS ONE 13 (12). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209472 . e0209472:1–e0209472:18 Ward, B., 2022. When are people most likely to buy online? https://www.salecycle. com/blog/stats/when- are- people- most- likely- to- buy- online/ . Nandita Pattnaik is a Ph.D. student in Computer Science at the University of Kent and a member of the Institute of Cyber Security for Society (iCSS). Her research fo- cuses on cyber security and privacy awareness, behaviour, practices and concerns in multi-user homes, where the inhabitants use multiple smart and traditional com- puting devices. Nandita has been teaching Computer Science to higher secondary and undergraduate students for most parts of her career in various parts of the world, including India, Oman and the UK. She has worked as a successful corpo- rate trainer, planning, developing, and delivering customised training on specialised computing software to small businesses and big corporations in India and UK. Nan- dita holds an honours degree in Analytical Economics and a BSc. In Computer Sci- ence. 14 N. Pattnaik, S. Li and J.R.C. Nurse Computers & Security 125 (2022) 103008 Shujun Li is Professor of Cyber Security at the School of Computing and Direc- tor of the Institute of Cyber Security for Society (iCSS), University of Kent, UK. He has published over 100 scientiﬁc papers, including ﬁve Best Papers including the 2022 IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems Guillemin-Cauer Best Paper Award. His research interests are about inter-disciplinary topics related to cyber security and privacy, human factors, digital forensics and cybercrime, multimedia comput- ing, and data science. Professor Shujun Li is on the editorial boards of multiple in- ternational journals and participated in the organisation of more than 100 interna- tional conferences and workshops. He is a Fellow of the BCS, a Senior Member of the IEEE, a Professional Member of the ACM, and a Vice President of the Association of British Chinese Professors (ABCP). Dr Jason R. C. Nurse is an Associate Professor in Cyber Security in the School of Computing at the University of Kent, UK and the Institute of Cyber Security for So- ciety (iCSS), UK. He also holds the roles of Visiting Academic at the University of Oxford, Visiting Fellow in Defence & Security at Cranﬁeld University, UK and Asso- ciate Fellow at the Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies (RUSI). His research interests include security and privacy risk management, corpo- rate communications and cyber security, secure and trustworthy Internet of Things, insider threat and cybercrime. Jason was selected as a Rising Star for his research into cybersecurity, as a part of the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council’s Recognising Inspirational Scientists and Engineers (RISE) awards campaign. Dr Nurse holds a Ph.D. in cyber security, an M.Sc. in Internet Computing and a B.Sc. in Computer Science and Accounting. He has published over 100 peer-reviewed ar- ticles in internationally recognised security journals and conferences. 15