A Deep Multi-Modal Cyber-Attack Detection in Industrial Control Systems Sepideh Bahadoripour Schulich School of Engineering University of Calgary Calgary, Canada sepideh.bahadoripour@ucalgary.ca Ethan MacDonald Schulich School of Engineering University of Calgary Calgary, Canada ethan.macdonald@ucalgary.ca Hadis Karimipour Schulich School of Engineering University of Calgary Calgary, Canada hadis.karimipour@ucalgary.ca Abstract—The growing number of cyber-attacks against Indus- trial Control Systems (ICS) in recent years has elevated security concerns due to the potential catastrophic impact. Considering the complex nature of ICS, detecting a cyber-attack in them is extremely challenging and requires advanced methods that can harness multiple data modalities. This research utilizes network and sensor modality data from ICS processed with a deep multi- modal cyber-attack detection model for ICS. Results using the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) system show that the proposed model can outperform existing single modality models and recent works in the literature by achieving 0.99 precision, 0.98 recall, and 0.98 f-measure, which shows the effectiveness of using both modalities in a combined model for detecting cyber-attacks. Index Terms—industrial control system, multi-modal, cyber- attack detection, machine learning, deep learning, time-series. I. INTRODUCTION Industrial Control System (ICS)s are crucial for monitoring and controlling critical infrastructure such as smart grids, oil and gas industry, and transportation. Traditionally, ICSs were placed on isolated communications systems to keep them safe from cyber-attacks, where they were relatively inconspicuous and unknown to most attackers [1]. The connection between ICS wide area networks facilitates the online access, monitoring, and control of the systems remotely. The drawback of wide area network integration is increased attack surfaces in ICS and increased vulnerability to cyber-criminals [2]. The Stuxnet campaign that targeted Iranian centrifuges for nuclear enrichment in 2010, and caused severe damage to the equipment is one high-proﬁle example [3]. Several other prominent examples include: cyber-attacks affecting three U.S. gas pipeline companies in 2018 [3], and two U.S. water treatment systems in 2021 [4]. Due to the complexity and sensitivity of the ICS environment, a compromise in the system may lead to severe danger to human life or the environment. Moreover, the growing number of cyber-attacks against ICS in recent years motivates the need for timely security solutions for these systems [5]. Although security solutions developed for Information Technology (IT) are mature, they are not sufﬁcient due to differences between ICS and IT [6]. While the IT networks mainly focus on managing the high throughput of a network, ICS networks have to function more towards carrying out tasks reliably and punctually. When failure occurs, the ICS network cannot merely be rebooted, like a typical computer network [7]. In addition, ICS introduces more security vulnerability due to the tight integration between the controlled physical environment and the cyber system [8]. Compared to the IT protocols, ICS protocols, including Modbus or DNP3, suffer from common security issues such as the absence of authentication, lack of protection or security measures for data transferring over the link, and insufﬁcient control measures to avoid default broadcast approaches [7]. Considering the vital role of ICS in critical infrastructural operations, various methods for cyber-threat detection and classiﬁcation have been proposed in the literature to address the above-mentioned challenges. Model-based solutions, such as variants of state estimation techniques and statistical-based models, have been suggested in [9]. Additionally, the use of Kalman ﬁlters for measurement estimation is also pro- posed to detect cyber-attacks [10]. However, such model-based techniques are difﬁcult to adapt to larger stochastic systems and various threats. Intelligent systems are thus proposed for detecting and classifying cyber-attacks [11]. The current work proposes a multi-modal cyber-attack de- tection model to analyze sensor and network modalities of an ICS and detect cyber-attacks based on their joint abstract representation. Due to the different structures of sensor and network data, a complex deep neural network includes a par- tially connected stacked Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and neural network model, connected to a fully connected fusion network is proposed in this research. The proposed model is able to analyze each modality separately and then combine the key ﬁndings of each modality automatically using a deep neural network with a single training. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces some works in the literature. Section III explains the proposed model, which is followed by the experimental setup in Section IV. Section V presents the evaluation results of the proposed model and compares it with some single modality models in the literature. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. II. LITERATURE REVIEW Machine Learning (ML)-based attack detection techniques work based on a moving target to continually evolve and learn arXiv:2304.01440v1 [cs.CR] 4 Apr 2023 new vulnerabilities rather than identifying the attack signatures or the regular pattern of the network [12]. There are different ML algorithms available in the literature to detect cyber- attacks compromising data integrity [13], availability [14], and conﬁdentiality [2]. ML-based methods are categorized into two main categories, conventional and Deep Neural Network (DNN). A. Conventional Machine Learning-Based Cyber-Attack De- tection In work by Zolanvari et al. [2], the authors compared several traditional ML algorithms, including K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree (DT), Logistic Regression (LR), Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN), Na¨ıve Bayes (NB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) to detect cyber-attacks in a water storage system. Their evaluation showed that the RF algorithm is the best model with a recall of 0.9744, the ANN is the ﬁfth algorithm with a recall of 0.8718, and the LR is the worst algorithm with a recall of 0.4744. They also reported that the ANN could not detect 12.82% of the attacks but considered 0.03% of the normal samples as an attack due to the imbalanced nature of the data. Based on the results, the authors considered many attack samples as normal samples without labeling so many normal samples as an attack happened for LR, SVM, and KNN. Therefore, these ML algorithms are sensitive to imbalanced data and unsuitable for ICS attack detection. In 2019, Sakhnini et al. [15] proposed three feature selection methods, including binary cuckoo search, a genetic algorithm, and binary particle swarm optimization, which were analyzed to detect false data injection attack samples. The selected features were passed to SVM, KNN, and ANN models for classiﬁcation. The evaluation shows that the SVM model outperforms the other classiﬁers in detecting cyber-attacks on three smart grid datasets. Moreover, the evaluation illustrated that the genetic algorithm feature selection was the best at selecting a set of features among the feature selection methods. In [16], the authors proposed a Logical Analysis of Data (LAD) method to extract patterns/rules from the sensor data and used them to design a two-step anomaly detection system. They compared the proposed LAD method with DNN, SVM, and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models. The eval- uations showed that the DNN outperformed the LAD method in the precision metric; however, the LAD performed better in recall and f-measure. In [17], a Stacked Autoencoder (SAE)- based cyber-attack detection model for smart grid systems was proposed. This model was evaluated using three smart grid datasets and compared with conventional ML approaches. The evaluations showed that the proposed method outperformed all other methods in all the metrics. In 2022, Mittal et al. [18] proposed a gravitational search algorithm-based clustering to analyze the ICS data and detect cyber-attacks. Their model was evaluated on several datasets and compared with some other search-based algorithms in the literature. B. Deep Learning-Based Cyber-Attack Detection In [19], a deep cyber-attack detection method for real- time detection of false data injection attacks was proposed for smart grid systems. In this study, the effect of using different numbers of hidden layers on the model’s performance is analyzed. The evaluations showed that the accuracy of a deeper model is higher than the shallower ones. Later work by Wang et al. [20] proposed a DNN state estimation method for cyber-attack detection. In this method, the state estimation was done using an SAE, and an attack was detected by comparing the estimated state with the actual one. In [21], the authors used autoencoders to detect cyber-attacks and restore injected data. Two types of autoencoders were used in this study. An undercomplete model was used for cyber-attack detection, and a denoising model was used to restore the attacked data. They compared this method to SVM-based cyber-attack detection approach and showed that their proposed method outperformed them in attack detection, especially the previous unseen attack samples. Moreover, in [22], the authors proposed a scalable deep cyber-attack detection for smart grids. This method was evaluated on a large-scale smart grid dataset and reported an accuracy of around 99% for all scenarios. Moreover, in 2021, Althobaiti et al. [23] proposed a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)-based cognitive computing intrusion detection for ICS. In their proposed method, ﬁrst, the optimal subset of features was selected using a feature selection approach. Then, a GRU model was applied to the selected fea- tures to detect cyber-attacks. Moreover, Nesterov-accelerated Adaptive Moment Estimation (NADAM) optimizer was used to increase the model’s accuracy. In another manuscript, a novel deep representation learning approach was used to handle the challenge of imbalanced data in detecting cyber- attacks [24]. This model was evaluated using two ICS datasets and the results show the effectiveness of the proposed method. In addition, in [25], the authors proposed a LSTM encoder- decoder model to detect cyber-attacks. In this method, a raw network trafﬁc dataset was used, and a feature extraction method was used to extract features from the raw data. The ex- tracted features were then passed through an encoder-decoder model and, the reconstruction error of this model is used to detect cyber-attacks. This method was evaluated using an ICS dataset that shows 97.95% accuracy, 0.98 precision, 0.9663 recall, and 0.9789 f-measure on the gas pipeline dataset. In another study [26], the authors proposed a DNN-based method to detect false data injection attacks. The chi-squared test was ﬁrst performed on the dataset to assign a weight to each feature based on its correlation with the output. The weighted features were then passed through a SAE to generate new representations. Finally, the data in the latent space was used to build an ensemble of randomized DTs. The majority voting method is used to detect cyber-attacks, and was evaluated on four power system datasets and com- pared with conventional ML methods. The results illustrate that the DNN method outperforms the others in detecting cyber-attacks. Recently, federated learning-based cyber-attack detection approaches have increased in popularity due to the ability to preserve privacy of ICS data by training the models locally inside the clients and share the model parameters with a server to build a global model for all the clients [27], [28]. In another study, Kravchik and Shabtai [29] proposed a lightweight deep model to detect ICS cyber-attacks. They used 1D CNN and undercomplete AutoEncoder (AE) to detect cyber-attacks using sensor data. Their experiments on the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset showed that their CNN model achieved 0.90 precision, 0.87 recall, and 0.88 f-measure while their AE model gained 0.96 precision, 0.93 recall, and 0.94 f-measure. While the existing ML-based approach can achieve accept- able results in detecting cyber-attacks in ICS, to the best of the authors, none of them consider the multi-modality of ICS environments in their solutions. To handle this gap, this work proposes a multi-modal cyber-attack detection component that used sensor and network modalities of ICS environment to detect cyber-attacks more accurately. III. THE PROPOSED DEEP MULTI-MODAL CYBER-ATTACK DETECTION MODEL In the proposed model, a multi-modal DNN, including net- work and sensor modalities, was used to detect cyber-attacks in real time. For each sample in sensor data, several network samples are available that show the transmitted packets in the ICS network between IT and Operational Technology (OT) layers. A fully connected deep neural network is used to map the sensor data to a latent space, while a stacked LSTM model is used to analyze the network data sequence and map it to the network latent space. These two new representations are then fused into a fully connected fusion network and ﬁnally classiﬁed using a single layer. Figure 1 shows the proposed multi-modal cyber-attack detection model. Assume D = {(x(i) S , x(i) N ), y(i)} is the data where xS is a vector belongs to sensor modality, xN is a matrix of several network modality, y is the label, and i is the sample number which is i ∈(1, M) where M is the number of samples in the dataset. The following subsections explain each part of the proposed model in detail. A. Sensor Model Sensor modality contains a vector of features for each sample in the dataset. The features of this modality (as will be discussed in section IV) are the sensor measurement and actuator status of the ICS. A fully connected DNN is proposed to analyze these features xS and map them to a sensor latent space hS. In the training step, the sensor part of each sample xS is passed to this model. Equation 1 shows the mapping of an input to a new representation using a single fully connected layer. hS = σ(xS, W) (1) where hS is the new representation of sample xS, W is the weights of this layer, and σ is the layer’s activation function. The output of this layer is passed to the next layer to make a more abstract non-linear representation of the sensor data. In this work, a four-layer fully connected DNN is used for sensor modality. The output of the forth-layer hS is used as the ﬁnal representation of the this modality. Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) is used as the activation function in this model ( 2). ReLU(x) = max(0, x) (2) B. Network Model In each ICS, several network packets are transmitted be- tween different assets in the network at each time. So, for each sensor sample, several network samples are available. Therefore, a stacked LSTM model is proposed to handle the transmitted packets xN and map them into the network latent space hN. In the training process, the network part of each sample xN is passed to this model. In an LSTM model, the training is done based on the samples in a time-series. Equation 3 shows the mapping of the time-series sample xN to the hidden latent space hN. ht N = f(Uxt N, Wht−1 N ) (3) where hT N is the network latent space for the t-th time in the time-series, U and W are the LSTM weights, and xt N is the feature vectors of the t-th time-series of the network samples, and f is the non-linear activation function of this model. Equation 4 shows the output of the proposed LSTM model. ot N = f(V ht N) (4) where ot N is the output for the t-th element of the time-series, V is the LSTM weight, hT N is the network latent space for the t-th time in the time-series, and f is a non-linear activation function. In the proposed network modality model, three LSTM layers are stacked to form a stacked LSTM model. In this situation, the outputs of each time-series element in an LSTM (except the last one) are concatenated together to form a matrix and are used as a time-series input of the next LSTM model. However, for the last LSTM, only the ﬁnal output is used as the network representation of the model oN. C. Fusion and Classiﬁcation Model After mapping the original features from each modality to a latent space, these two new representations are then passed to another fully connected deep model to fuse them. The output of this model is a joint representation of both modalities that consider the main abstract information in them. Sensor and network representations, hS and oN, are then passed to this model to fuse the learned representations. Equation 5 shows this representation learning. h = σ((hS, oN), W) (5) where h is the joint representation, hS is the sensor represen- tation generated from the sensor modality model, oN is the network representation generated from the network modality model, and W is the weights of this model. This network is a two-layer fully connected neural network with ReLU activation function (see equation 2). ... ... ... Sensor Data Network Data LSTM LSTM LSTM Fusion Layers Classification Layer ... ... ... Fig. 1. The proposed multi-modal cyber-attack detection model, including a fully connected deep model to analyze sensor modality, a stacked LSTM model to analyze network modality, a fully connected deep model as a fusion model, and a single binary classiﬁcation layer. The joint representation is then passed through a single classiﬁcation layer with binary cross entropy loss (see equation 7) and softmax activation function (see equation 8) to classify the samples as normal or attack, based on their sensor and network modalities, using equation 6. ˆy = softmax(h × Wc + bc) (6) where ˆy is the predicted label, h is the joint representation, Wc is the classiﬁer weights, and bc is the classiﬁers bias. L = −1 M M X i=1 (yilog ˆyi + (1 −(yi)log(1 −ˆyi))) (7) where L is the binary cross entropy loss, M is the number of samples, yi is the actual label of the i-th sample, and ˆyi is the predicted label for the i-th sample. softmax(si) = esi P2 j=1 esj (8) Algorithm 1 shows the algorithm of the proposed model. IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP To evaluate the proposed model, the SWaT dataset [30], which includes both network and sensor modalities, was used. The SWaT dataset is collected at the Singapore University of Technology from a water treatment system consisting of 449,920 samples. In this dataset, 87.9% and 12.1% were normal and attack samples, respectively. Sensor modality includes 51 features, each showing a sensor measurement or an actuator status. On the other hand, network modality includes 16 features extracted from the transmitted packets in the ICS network. A. Pre-Processing The mentioned data is pre-processed before passing it to the model. First, the mean value of each feature is used to impute the missing values. Then, equation 9 is used to normalize the data between zero and one. xnormalized = x −min(x) max(x) −min(x) (9) B. Evaluation Metrics The proposed model is compared with several recent studies in the literature. Similar to other approaches, we used standard ML metrics to evaluate the performance of the proposed model. The basic ML evaluation metrics are: • True Positive (TP)– Number of correctly classiﬁed sam- ples as attack. • True Negative (TN)– Number of correctly classiﬁed sam- ples as normal. • False Positive (FP)– Number of wrongly classiﬁed sam- ples as attack. • False Negative (FN)– Number of wrongly classiﬁed sam- ples as normal. Based on these basic metrics, more complicated metrics are deﬁned that are used in this work, including: • Precision indicates the number of samples that are de- tected correctly as attack over total samples detected as attack (see equation 10). • Recall indicates the number of samples that are detected correctly as attack over the total samples of the attack in the dataset (see equation 11). Algorithm 1: The algorithm of the proposed multi- modal cyber-attack detection model. Data: Multi-modal data D = {(x(i) S , x(i) N ), y(i)} i ∈(1, M) Pre-processing • Impute missing values: xi mod[k] = 1 M PM j=1 xj mod[k], ifxj mod ̸= None, mod ∈Sensor, Network • Data normalization: xnormalized mod = x−min(xmod) max(xmod)−min(xmod) mod ∈Sensor, Network Training: for Epoch e do • Pass xS through a fully connected neural network: hS = σ(xS, WS) • Pass xN through an stacked LSTM: ht N = f(Uxt N, Wht−1 N ) ot N = f(V ht N) • Pass the new representations through the fusion model: h = σ((hS, oN), W) • Use a classiﬁcation layer for cyber-attack detection: ˆy = softmax(h × Wc + bc) • Use binary cross entropy to update the weights: L = −1 M PM i=1(yilog ˆyi + (1 −yi)log(1 −ˆyi))) end Output: Predicted labels for each sample ˆy • F1-Score is the harmonic value of precision and recall (see equation 12). Due to the use of imbalanced data in this work, accuracy metric is not considered for comparison. Precision = TP TP + FP (10) Recall = TP TP + FN (11) F1 −Score = 2 × Precision × Recall Precision + Recall (12) V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The proposed multi-modal cyber-attack detection model was evaluated using an ICS dataset consisting of a sensor and network modalities. The use of multiple modalities of data in the proposed model allows for a more comprehensive analysis of the ICS environment, which can improve the robustness and accuracy of cyber-attack detection. However, the utilization of different data modalities also poses certain challenges, such as the need to synchronize the datasets before training the model. TABLE I RESULTS OF THE EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED MULTI-MODAL CYBER-ATTACK DETECTION MODEL AND ITS COMPARISON WITH SINGLE MODALITY APPROACHES. Model Precision Recall f-measure Proposed Method 0.99 0.98 0.98 Sensor Model 0.98 0.68 0.80 Network Model 0.95 0.63 0.75 LAD-ADS [16] 0.94 0.89 0.91 CNN [29] 0.0.90 0.87 0.88 AE [29] 0.96 0.93 0.94 This process can be time-consuming, especially when dealing with large datasets, and is considered the main limitation of the proposed model. Table I shows the experimental results of evaluating the proposed model and its comparison with the single modality models and two existing works in the literature. As illustrated in this table, the proposed multi-modal model achieved a precision of 0.99, recall of 0.98, and f-measure of 0.98, which outperformed the other methods in all metrics. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of using both sensor and network modalities in a single model for cyber-attack detection in ICS environments. While the single modal models in Table I gain a high precision, they cannot achieve a good recall due to the use of imbalanced data that caused a high number of evaded attacks from the model. However, the proposed model can handle this challenge and achieve a high recall that shows the effectiveness of using both modalities in a single model. On the other hand, LAD-ADS [16] and CNN [29] models achieved a reasonable recall score by modifying the model that sacriﬁced the precision score, resulting in a higher number of false alarms of these models, which is handled in the proposed model. Figure 2 shows the confusion matrix of the proposed model. As illustrated in this ﬁgure, the proposed model only has 0.1% of false alarms and 2.3% of evaded attacks, which shows its good performance in detecting cyber-attacks. Having a low number of evaded attacks on a highly imbalanced dataset shows the ability of the proposed deep multi-modal model to handle this challenge. VI. CONCLUSION In this project, a multi-modal cyber-attack detection model is proposed to analyze sensor and network modalities of ICS environments and build an abstract joint representation based on these modalities. In the proposed model, a fully connected DNN is used to map the sensor modality to the sensor latent space, while a stacked LSTM model is used to encode the time-series network data into network latent space. The evaluation results show that the proposed model outperformed all other models with 0.99 precision, 0.98 recall, and 0.98 f-measure metrics. Moreover, the proposed model has low false alarms and evaded attack samples that show its ability Fig. 2. The confusion matrix of the proposed multi-modal cyber-attack detection model. to handle imbalanced data, which shows the effectiveness of using different modalities in the proposed model. REFERENCES [1] J. Sakhnini, H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, and R. M. Parizi, “Phys- ical layer attack identiﬁcation and localization in cyber–physical grid: An ensemble deep learning based approach,” Physical Communication, vol. 47, p. 101394, 2021. [2] M. Zolanvari, M. A. Teixeira, L. Gupta, K. M. Khan, and R. Jain, “Machine Learning-Based Network Vulnerability Analysis of Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6822–6834, 2019. [3] F. Zhang, H. A. D. E. Kodituwakku, J. W. Hines, and J. Coble, “Multilayer Data-Driven Cyber-Attack Detection System for Industrial Control Systems Based on Network, System, and Process Data,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4362–4369, 2019. [4] K. Collier, “50,000 security disasters waiting to happen: The problem of America’s water supplies,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/security/ hacker-tried-poison-calif-water-supply-was-easy-entering-password-rcna1206 [5] A. Al-Abassi, A. Namavar Jahromi, H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, P. Siano, and H. Leung, “A self-tuning cyber-attacks’ location iden- tiﬁcation approach for critical infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 5018–5027, 2022. [6] W. Yan, L. K. Mestha, and M. Abbaszadeh, “Attack Detection for Securing Cyber Physical Systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8471–8481, 2019. [7] S. Singh, H. Karimipour, H. HaddadPajouh, and A. Dehghantanha, Artiﬁcial intelligence and security of industrial control systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 121–164. [8] K. Paridari, N. O’Mahony, A. El-Din Mady, R. Chabukswar, M. Boubekeur, and H. Sandberg, “A Framework for Attack-Resilient Industrial Control Systems: Attack Detection and Controller Reconﬁg- uration,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 113–128, 2018. [9] Shuguang Cui, Zhu Han, S. Kar, T. T. Kim, H. V. Poor, and A. Tajer, “Coordinated Data-Injection Attack and Detection in the Smart Grid: A Detailed Look at Enriching Detection Solutions,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 106–115, sep 2012. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6279584/ [10] M. N. Kurt, Y. Yilmaz, and X. Wang, “Distributed Quickest Detection of Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grid,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 2015–2030, aug 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8278264/ [11] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K. R. Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classiﬁcation model for anomaly-based intrusion detection in iot backbone networks,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 314–323, April 2019. [12] S. Ponomarev and T. Atkison, “Industrial control system network intru- sion detection by telemetry analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 252–260, 2016. [13] H. Karimipour and H. Leung, “Relaxation-based anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems using ensemble Kalman ﬁlter,” IET Cyber- Physical Systems: Theory & Applications, 2019. [14] B. Krawczyk, “Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future directions,” Progress in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 221–232, 2016. [15] J. Sakhnini, H. Karimipour, and A. Dehghantanha, “Smart grid cyber attacks detection using supervised learning and heuristic feature selec- tion,” in 2019 IEEE 7th international conference on smart energy grid engineering (SEGE). IEEE, 2019, pp. 108–112. [16] T. K. Das, S. Adepu, and J. Zhou, “Anomaly detection in industrial control systems using logical analysis of data,” Computers & Security, vol. 96, p. 101935, 2020. [17] A. Al-Abassi, J. Sakhnini, and H. Karimipour, “Unsupervised stacked autoencoders for anomaly detection on smart cyber-physical grids,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 3123–3129. [18] H. Mittal, A. K. Tripathi, A. C. Pandey, M. D. Alshehri, M. Saraswat, and R. Pal, “A new intrusion detection method for cyber–physical system in emerging industrial IoT,” Computer Communications, vol. 190, pp. 24–35, 2022. [19] Y. He, G. J. Mendis, and J. Wei, “Real-time detection of false data injection attacks in smart grid: A deep learning-based intelligent mech- anism,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2505–2516, 2017. [20] H. Wang, J. Ruan, G. Wang, B. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. Fu, and J. Peng, “Deep Learning-Based Interval State Estimation of AC Smart Grids Against Sparse Cyber Attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 4766–4778, nov 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8288611/ [21] M. M. N. Aboelwafa, K. G. Seddik, M. H. Eldefrawy, Y. Gadallah, and M. Gidlund, “A machine-learning-based technique for false data injection attacks detection in industrial iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 8462–8471, 2020. [22] H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, K. R. Choo, and H. Leung, “A deep and scalable unsupervised machine learning system for cyber-attack detection in large-scale smart grids,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 80 778–80 788, 2019. [23] M. M. Althobaiti, K. P. M. Kumar, D. Gupta, S. Kumar, and R. F. Man- sour, “An intelligent cognitive computing based intrusion detection for industrial cyber-physical systems,” Measurement, vol. 186, p. 110145, 2021. [24] A. Namavar Jahromi, H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Toward detection and attribution of cyber-attacks in iot-enabled cyber–physical systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 17, pp. 13 712–13 722, 2021. [25] I. A. Khan, M. Keshk, D. Pi, N. Khan, Y. Hussain, and H. Soliman, “Enhancing IIoT networks protection: A robust security model for attack detection in internet industrial control systems,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 134, p. 102930, 2022. [26] S. H. Majidi, S. Hadayeghparast, and H. Karimipour, “FDI attack detection using extra trees algorithm and deep learning algorithm- autoencoder in smart grid,” International Journal of Critical Infrastruc- ture Protection, vol. 37, p. 100508, 2022. [27] A. Namavar Jahromi, H. Karimipour, and A. Dehghantanha, “Deep federated learning-based cyber-attack detection in industrial control systems,” in 2021 18th International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6. [28] A. NamavarJahromi, H. Karimipour, and A. Dehghantanha, “An ensem- ble deep federated learning cyber-threat hunting model for industrial internet of things,” Computer Communications, vol. 198, pp. 108–116, 2023. [29] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efﬁcient cyber attack detection in indus- trial control systems using lightweight neural networks and pca,” IEEE transactions on dependable and secure computing, pp. 1–1, 2021. [30] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Crit- ical Information Infrastructures Security, G. Havarneanu, R. Setola, H. Nassopoulos, and S. Wolthusen, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 88–99.