Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template The aesthetics of cyber security: How do users perceive them? Mark Quinlan, Aaron Ceross and Andrew Simpson Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Wolfson Building, Parks Rd, Oxford, OX1 3QD, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): mark.quinlan@cs.ox.ac.uk; Contributing authors: aaron.ceross@cs.ox.ac.uk; andrew.simpson@cs.ox.ac.uk; Abstract While specific aesthetic philosophies may differ across cultures, all human societies have used aesthetics to support communication and learning. Within the fields of usability and usable security, aesthet- ics have been deployed for such diverse purposes as enhancing stu- dents’ e-learning experiences and optimising user interface design. In this paper, we seek to understand how individual users perceive the visual assets that accompany cyber security information, and how these visual assets and user perceptions underwrite a distinct cyber security aesthetic. We ask, (1) What constitutes cyber security aesthet- ics, from the perspective of an individual user? and (2) How might these aesthetics affect users’ perceived self-efficacy as they informally learn cyber security precepts? To begin answering these questions, we compile an image-set from cyber security web articles and anal- yse the distinct visual properties and sentiments of these images. Keywords: cyber security, aesthetics, visual learning 1 arXiv:2306.08171v1 [cs.CY] 13 Jun 2023 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 2 Article Title 1 Introduction Visual media, like illustrations [1] and diagrams [2], have accompanied text since the very first written documents [3], providing clarification, communi- cating distinct emotions or opinions, and serving more subversive ends like propaganda [4–6]. Today, digital technologies have introduced new types and ways of accessing visual media while rapidly integrating media consumption into the daily lives of large segments of the global population [7]. Still, con- temporary online news articles and blog posts are often accompanied by visual media that serve many of the same communicative purposes as those in the earliest human documents [8]. The fields of usable security and cyber security have used visual media to support learning. For example, user interface designers used (and later aban- doned) skeuomorphism to generate easily identifiable visual objects that could help users to navigate new interfaces [9, 10], and they frequently use colours to draw attention to salient information and features within e-learning plat- forms [11, 12]. Meanwhile, usable security experts explore how visual cues can aid users outside of formal learning environments — that is, how and when visual media can facilitate informal learning. Informal learning is the primary way in which adults learn about the world around them [13, 14], and it typically occurs when individuals actively choose to seek out new ideas and advice. Understanding how visual media work to support communication and learning is a complex task, and it is divided amongst many scholarly disci- plines. First and foremost amongst these is the ancient philosophical branch of aesthetics, which concerns itself with the nature of perception, taste, and the values of sensory qualities (e.g., beauty). In the context of this paper, aesthet- ics entail the perceptual logic that allows individuals to instinctively analyse meaning and appraise quality / truth when consuming visual media — whether as stand-alone objects, as part of a user interface, or as an accompaniment to text. By extension, learned aesthetic preferences may influence how individuals navigate information or environments [15–18], and they may play a significant role in informal learning. There is a body of literature within the computer science usable security field that looks at users’ aesthetic perceptions of technology. For example, work by Fogg et al. [19] found that almost half of all users used aesthetic judgements to infer the credibility of a site’s content. Compounding these results, Robin- son et al. [20] found that individuals use aesthetic information to make rapid judgements about content, and Alsudani and Casey [21] reported that these judgements occur within about 3.5 seconds. In the sub-area of cyber security aesthetics, [22] outlined various cyber security visualisation techniques, and [17] looked at the adaptation of neo-noir aesthetics in cyber security visual media. There is also work within the field of digital exhibits [23] and the transfer of security aesthetics into cyber security [24]. Taken together, these precedents suggest that cyber security aesthetics can serve as a pedagogical tool, helping users to parse information and act upon it. Thus, improving Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 3 our understanding of these aesthetics could help us to improve the efficacy of security advice dissemination. In this paper, we explore the following research aims: 1. What cyber security aesthetics consist of, from the perspective of an individual user. 2. Provide an explorative discussion as to the manner in which these aesthet- ics may affect users’ perceived self-efficacy as they informally learn cyber security precepts. To do so, we report on how we assembled an image-set of cyber security images that reflects what a user typically sees within an informal learning environment. The corpus spans 1,027 images and is derived from English lan- guage news and online magazine articles from the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The images are organised into several classes, which we derived by extracting visual information from the raw images and mapping them to semantically meaningful keywords, and performed a colour similarity analysis. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we pro- vide the background to, and the motivation for, the work described in this paper. In addition, we define some of the terms of interest. In Section 3 we describe the process used to create the image-set, as well as the data clean- ing process we used to develop the image-set into usable images. In Sections 4 and 5 we present and discuss our results, placing them in a broader con- text. Section 6 presents potential research directions for the broader research community. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper. 2 Background and Motivation In this section we discuss the background to, and the motivation for, the work described in this paper. As aesthetics is such a broad and sometimes ambiguous term [25], we begin by providing an overview of aesthetics research in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, establishing its relevance for our research aims. We then consider the potential efficacy of aesthetics for cyber security in Section 2.3. Section 2.4 then returns to our overarching research aims. 2.1 Aesthetics and meaning In Ancient Greece, aesthetics were first described as a ‘sensation’, or the abil- ity to interact with external stimuli through our bodily senses [26]. Later, Kant [27] espoused the importance of aesthetics for all human domains, argu- ing that, without its sense-making power, data would simply remain chaotic, lacking meaning and structure.1 However, if aesthetics help to render a shared sensible reality, as asserted by Kant [27, 28], then aesthetic perception must 1This could mean that data acquires a certain aesthetic once created (mathematical aes- thetics [27]), or that, to have an aesthetic perspective, one must assemble data fragments into something meaningful regardless of outcome [27]. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 4 Article Title be universal, narrative, and standardised. This brings us into the sphere of semiotics — the study of signs, symbols, and symbolisation, or of the devices and practices that help to stabilise meanings. For the purposes of this paper, we define aesthetics as the perceptual logic that allows individuals to instinctively analyse meaning in visual media, and semiotics as the conventionalised meanings arising from this perceptual process. In other words, where aesthetic objects exist solely for their own pur- poses [27], informing perceptible meaning [29, 30] without requiring a specific meaning to be understood, semiotic objects contain explicitly built-in mean- ings, whether skeuomorphic or otherwise [18, 31], and can enhance the meaning of words they are associated with (for example, as a compendium to a body of text [25]). Both aesthetic and semiotic perspectives remain relevant in contemporary philosophical discourse, as well as in the practice of cyber security. For exam- ple, [32] describe how viewers attempt to derive meaning from key referent objects contained within an image. Insofar as these objects are universally understood, they may yield what Ranciere calls ‘a shared sense of percep- tion’ [33]. Furthermore, in the context of cyber aesthetics, most interactions at the interface level are directed by symbols and imagery such as icons, pointers, image thumbnails — which themselves can contain semiotic objects — and so forth. All of these objects help to convey a system logic to end users, thus enhancing accuracy and intuitiveness [34]. Of course, in a nascent field like cyber security, aesthetic systems have not necessarily been formalised into stable semiotic resources. As such, we must not preemptively constrain our analysis to specific image contents, addressing instead the full spectrum of aesthetic objects relevant to cyber security commu- nication. In this case, we define these to be (visible) digital image-objects that may themselves contain semiotically legible signs, and which have been added as an adornment or supplement to relevant cyber security literature. Although this definition presents some limitations (discussed in due course), it allows us to account for the narrative functions of aesthetics, as well as for its use in learning. 2.2 Aesthetics and learning Because we are primarily interested in how users may interpret cyber security aesthetics in an informal learning context, our understanding of aesthetics is informed by contributions such as that of [35], which draws from the human- ities and sciences to illustrate how aesthetics influence the choices humans make in their given domains of activity. Earlier work by [36] went further, identifying aesthetics as one of four distinct structures human beings use when developing knowledge, the other three being personal, empirical, and ethical. For Carper, the ‘knowing’ of aesthetics takes the other three structures and enhances them into a new understanding, creating meaning from otherwise abstract works [36]. Building on Ancient Greek notions of aesthetics, [37] pro- posed the concept of ‘aesthetic knowledge’, wherein sensory experiences form Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 5 embedded relationships with phenomena such as colour and shape. According to Keenan, when prior aesthetic knowledge is combined with information (or, in our case, images) from user interfaces and other elements within a digital experience, users can associate prior meanings with this new information and thereby generate unanticipated interactions [37]. Taken as a form of knowledge, aesthetic design can enhance users’ ability to make effective decisions based on a mixture of intuition and explicitly learnt knowledge [38]. We know that people often make decisions based on intuition rather than analytical inference, ‘sensing’ a correct choice without being able to offer a logical explanation for it [28]; we may also expect that aesthetic objects can serve to stimulate this intuition. For example, within human–computer interaction, supplementary visual assets that convey a feeling of uncertainty or ambiguity can help individuals to comprehend uncertainty even when it is not explicitly communicated in words [39]. It follows that aesthetic knowledge will impact knowledge acquisition in any given field, including fields where many users rely on informally learnt knowledge (such as cyber security [40]) or cases where decision makers do not have prior experience with the given situation [28]. 2.3 Aesthetics and self-efficacy Clearly, the way in which we are presented with information visually impacts our understanding of, and subsequent decision making towards, a particular topic. As such, usable security research, user interface design, and cognitive psychology theory have sought to better understand how and why users make aesthetic decisions, and how aesthetic attributes can be designed to achieve certain ends. For instance, some scholars studying the ethics of technological development have proposed tools to help designers build fairness and trans- parency into digital libraries and interface designs through deliberate aesthetic planning [31]. Other researchers have explored how particular aesthetic / semi- otic interpretations of user interfaces can enable users to complete a given task more efficiently [18]. This latter effect is particularly interesting in the context of cyber security, given the brunt of responsibility that individual users have to bear for protecting themselves, their devices, and their networks online. One important concept implicated in users’ decision making is self- efficacy — a generative capability to organise one’s skill-sets and beliefs towards a desired outcome [41]. According to self-efficacy theory, individ- ual users implicitly judge their own ability to cope with a given situation, thus developing self-efficacy beliefs for a specific domain. These beliefs inform whether individual users will initiate certain behaviours and carry them through to successful outcomes [41, 42]. Furthermore, self-efficacy is closely related to motivation: the greater the challenge a user faces, the more self- efficacy they will need to sustain their motivation [41, 43]. Because cyber security is perceived to be both important and complex, users tend to exhibit limited self-efficacy in this domain (as explained by [44] and explored by [45] through psychological and cultural means). Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 6 Article Title Many people develop some degree of self-efficacy through their identifica- tion with role models: people similar to themselves who display, and thereby make accessible, certain aspirational attitudes, behaviours, or capacities [46]. For example, [47] observed that role models in the media can encourage entrepreneurship amongst their viewers. Applying these insights to cyber security aesthetics, we may suggest that researchers can utilise aesthetics to enhance users’ self-efficacy by providing models, structuring and direct- ing behaviour towards goal setting, and measuring progress towards these goals [38]. 2.4 Our expectations for this exploration To summarise, we expect that users acquire an aesthetic literacy when they are repeatedly exposed to domain-specific content, and that this literacy helps them to navigate and derive meaning from future content. As per our first research aim, we aspire to understand the aesthetics (and thus aesthetic litera- cies) operative in the domain of cyber security, and so we will imaginatively replicate the process whereby users develop these literacies — that is, repeated exposure to the aesthetic objects of cyber security — by compiling an image- set of cyber security’s primary aesthetic objects, allowing us to appraise and compare them at once. We have defined these objects to be images that may themselves contain legible signs, and which are typically part of a larger piece of content like an online article. As per our second research aim, we will interpret the resulting aesthetics in terms of their likely effects for users’ self-efficacy. 3 Methodology In this section we discuss the research design of our study, which proceeded in five steps: 1. developing the image-scraping tool in Python to extract images from structured data sources; 2. configuring a viable search methodology based on common cyber security terminology; 3. cleaning the initial pool of images to yield a usable image-set; 4. preparing the labels and resources needed for computational image classifi- cation; and 5. performing colour analysis to confirm the internal consistency of each image class. 3.1 Developing the image-scraper Web scraping is a popular digital research technique that allows researchers to automatically capture freely available online data — that is, data that does not require privileged access [48] — via the use of scrapers. Our image-scraper is a simple tool designed to capture images from pages selected by our search methodology (discussed in Section 3.2). Rather than incorporate additional Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 7 system logic to ensure that all images were viable candidates for analysis, we chose to refine the image-set through subsequent data cleaning (discussed in Section 3.3). 3.2 Deriving relevant images from search terms To establish the list of search terms needed to guide the image-scraper, we fol- lowed the precedent of [49], who used Google Trends to automatically collect real search terms employed by the target audience.2 This focus on user-centred definitions excluded the possibility of replicating the work of [50], who looked at primary studies undertaken within academia. Instead, we followed the Systematic Mapping Study protocol presented by [51]. We defined a set of base search terms (for example, ‘cybersecurity’ OR ‘cyber’ AND ‘security’) and then added search terms derived from Google Trends (online OR advice OR protection OR protect OR prevent OR preventative OR tips OR email OR social network OR password OR hack OR hacked OR hacking). All search terms were technology-agnostic — they did not include explicit references to specific products or services. The image-scraper then returned all images that corresponded with content that included these terms within the title or body text. Though not exhaustive, this strategy yields an image-set that adequately represents operative definitions of cyber security, as actualised by users. There is, of course, scope for future improvement. 3.3 Cleaning the data The aforementioned search strategy yielded an initial image-set of 4,784 images, which we then subjected to an initial data cleaning based on the following inclusion / exclusion criteria (to enable consistency): • The image must be derived from a news or blog article that directly addresses at least one aspect of cyber security and / or explicitly contains our search terminology. Blog articles were limited to tutorials, editorials, tool demon- strations, and discussions of technical reports. Due to the nature of the assessment and the search methodology, we only retrieved images from English-language sources. • The image must be accessible and not hidden behind a paywall or other kind of lockout mechanism, as these obstacles restrict the amount of text that can be retrieved, making it difficult to explain why some images were included in a given article or blog post (that is, the role that the images serve in relation to the text). • The image cannot be a corporate logo or advertisement (like the lead slide of a corporate presentation). • The image must be at least 360x640 pixels for ease of processing. • The image must be in either .jpg or .png format. 2[49] sought to derive a more precise definition of security, and so they collected the terms that individuals used to search for security content. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 8 Article Title Fig. 1 The colour distance charts for our image class heat-maps. Similarity decreases as the x-axis moves from 0 (blue) to 1 (pink). Applying these criteria, we reduced the initial pool of 4,784 images to 3,757 usable images. We then counted and removed all duplicates3 and then down-sampled our images to a standard pixel resolution. This yielded a final image-set of 1,027 individual images, which we used for analysis 4. 3.4 Classifying the images The next step in the process involved feature extraction — a form of quanti- tative image classification wherein categorising labels are assigned to images based on specific extracted features. For our image-set, we chose to begin with object recognition to identify any potential semiotic objects (or signs) before moving onto semantic categorisation (categorising emotion or other subjective features). We utilised a variation of the Bag-of-Words (BoW) model to provide human-assigned classifications for our image-set. The BoW model is often used in situations where images require text categorisation but word order is not particularly important. We based our model on work by [52], selecting three knowledgeable cyber security researchers to manually locate dominant interest points in individual images (recreating feature extraction) and derive labels that represent these interest points. This solution presented several advantages over an automated set-up, as the expert knowledge allowed for more concise labelling, the ability to label occluded objects that would have been missed by automated methods, and the ability to construct a clearly defined codebook for our classification labels based on prior expertise. However, the contextual awareness these experts brought to the labelling exercise may have introduced some biases. This limitation could be mitigated in future studies by recruiting a wider range of annotators. 3.5 Measuring image similarity through colour To confirm the internal consistency of each image class derived from our classification process, we utilised Weller and Weastneat’s [53] quantitative, colour-based method for measuring image similarity. This involved transform- ing each image’s pixels into 3D coordinates to produce a multidimensional 3We counted the number of duplicates to assess the extent of duplication within cyber security aesthetics. 4This image-set can be found here: https://huggingface.co/datasets/Quinm101/cyberaesthetics. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 9 Table 1 The top ten classes in our image-set. Class Description No. 1. Physical traditional security semiotics (such as lock, key, or shield) 290 2. Hackerman archetype 88 3. Non-malicious users of cyberspace 81 4. Digital superpositions over cityscapes or skylines 72 5. Physical-digital hybrid workspaces 69 6. Abstract patterns (such as grids) 64 7. Textual content (such as explicit warn- ings) 61 8. Wall of code (incoherent or standard pro- gramming language) 61 9. Disembodied anatomy interacting with a physical device or digital overlay 42 10. Non-security-related skeuomorphism 32 color histogram for each image, then using the earth mover’s distance mea- sure [54] to compute the pairwise distances between histograms. We opted for this method over contour-recognition for object classification (as used by [55, 56]) because we had already classified our images according to their dom- inant features. Colour similarity measures also allow us to more confidently make qualitative assessments relevant to our research aims. Colour similarity heat-maps for each class will be shown later on in this paper, and can be interpreted through Figure 1. Each heat-map represents the relationship any given image has to the other images within its class, with blue cell colours indicating greater similarity and red cell colours indicating lesser similarity. 4 Results Using the process described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we compiled an image- set that covered a wide swathe of cyber security topics and their associated aesthetics. Small selections of images from each class are shown in Figures 2 and 3. Through the process described in Sections 3.4 and 3.5, we identified 32 distinct and internally consistent image classes in the image-set. These ranged from abstract interpretations of networked security to imagery depicting the binary view of cyber security as an eternal battle between malicious actors and their victims. However, because most of the images (80.6%) were concentrated in just ten major classes (as detailed in Table 1), we restrict our discussion to these classes. We further group these classes into four broad (but not mutually exclusive) categories: Objects, People, Places, and Others. 4.1 Colour As one would expect, colour features heavily across all of the classes in our image-set. If we use the heat-maps to discuss similarity potential across colour Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 10 Article Title Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.4 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.5 Example 2 Example 3 No.3 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.2 No.1 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Physical traditional security semiotics such as locks, keys or shields 290 images The hackerman archetype 88 images Digital superpositions over cityscapes or skylines Physical-digital workspaces Non-malicious users of cyberspace 72 images 69 images 81 images Example 1 Fig. 2 A random selection of images taken from classes 1-5. and texture (where radical differences may indicate domain-shift within the class [57]), then this section concerns itself with the qualitative use of colour as we see it across the complete image-set. Where many of the abstract forms seen in Class 6 utilise hues running the gamut from greens to blues which are almost always contrasted by dark back- grounds, it is clear from the complete image-set that no ‘universal’ definition Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 11 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.9 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.10 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.8 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 No.7 No.6 Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Abstract patterns (such as grids) 64 images Textual content (such as explicit warnings) 61 images Disembodied anatomy interacting with physical device or digital overlay Non-security related semiotics and skeuomorphism Wall of code (incoherent or standard programming language displayed) 42 images 32 images 61 images Fig. 3 A random selection of images taken from classes 6-10. or convention on the usage of colour exists within cyber security, beyond the heavy use of cyan blue5. 5This was already informally known to the cyber security community, where the cyan blue code #235594 was the most commonly found colour in a large image-set, but which is not explicitly referenced to here due to the fact it was not cleaned for duplicates and other issues, and con- tained little in the way of search methodology. It can be found here: https://daylight.berkeley. edu/cybersecurity-imagery/. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 12 Article Title Fig. 4 An example of the most commonly used colours within our top-two classes, simplified to 4-bit. All of the heat-maps highlight these similarities in colour. Where we find points of interest are in Class-1, where colour is used to denote objects as being of specific importance, ranging from useful to dangerous. We may contrast this with another aspect of cyberspace, the video game, where emphasis is placed on the colour of objects with which the player may interact [58]. This codification of objects again lacks a specific narrative, and objects that are beneficial often share hues with those semiotics deemed dangerous. In between the classes, a specific colour analysis leads to results of limited immediate utility. Turning our attention to Figure 4, we see that our top-two image classes share a penchant for blacks, blues and whites. With this large amount of blacks and darker hues serving as background, we see in many classes a contrasting effect between the brightly coloured objects, spaces and vertices. In this manner, we hypothesise that colour may be used to draw the user’s attention to these objects, which exist in a space with no other domains to draw inspiration from, similar to video games [58]. A colour analysis may not allow us to infer further specifics as to their self-efficacy potential, in which the colours may be used to deliver a decoding of the messages present in the accompanying textual content. Instead, we look towards the objects, people, places and other aspects of the image. In these cases, we find the heat-maps to be of more use as an accompaniment to assess the credibility of the assertions. Each heat-map represents the relationship any given image has to the other images within its class, with blue cell colours indicating greater similarity and red cell colours indicating lesser similarity. 4.2 Objects Classes 1 and 10 feature objects associated with physical security, like locks, keys, and shields (and others identified by [24]); objects appropriated from non- security domains, such as cameras; and skeuomorphic adaptations of real-world objects, like digitised versions of envelopes. Class 1 contains 290 unique images with extraordinary colour similarity (as per Figure 5), implying consistent use of similar semiotics and colour schemes throughout. Class 10 is much smaller, featuring only 32 unique images, but it is notable for its wider variety of objects Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 13 Fig. 5 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 1 (Traditional physical-digital security semiotics). Fig. 6 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 10 (Non-security semiotics and skeuomorphism). and colours (see Figure 6). Figure 3 highlights some of the images from these classes. 4.3 People Classes 2 and 3 feature individuals who are implied to be malicious (Class 2) or non-malicious (Class 3) users of cyberspace. We also include Class 9 within this group, given its emphasis on human anatomy. Class 2 contains 88 unique images with significant colour similarity (see Figure 7), which in this case implies similar compositions — individuals assuming similar stances against similar (dark) background colours. Class 3 consists of 81 unique images and is slightly more varied in its make-up (as per Figure 8). Class 9 is the smallest and most differentiated class in this group, consisting of only 42 unique images with wider colour discrepancies in the heat-map (see Figure 9). Figure 2 highlights some images from Classes 2, 3, and 9 are shown in Figure 3. 4.4 Places Classes 4 and 5 feature specific places related to cyberspace and cyber security, such as futuristic urban spaces (Class 4) and workspaces (Class 5). Class 4 contains 72 unique images with significant colour similarity (see Figure 10), once again implying similar compositions and colour palettes. Class 5 consists of 69 unique images and is more varied, as can be seen in Figure 11. Figure 2 highlights some examples from Classes 4 and 5. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 14 Article Title Fig. 7 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 2 (Hackerman archetype). Fig. 8 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 3 (Non- malicious users of cyberspace). Fig. 9 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 9 (Disembodied anatomy interacting with a physical device or digital overlay). 4.5 Other Classes 6, 7, and 8 variously encompass imagery of digital patterns, alphanu- meric symbols, and other two-dimensional or abstract representations of cyberspace and cyber security. Class 6 contains 64 unique images with reason- able colour similarity (as per Figure 12); though similar background colours are frequently used to represent mathematically defined patterns and shapes, there is some variation based on other, supporting semiotic attributes in this category. Class 7 consists of 61 images that are slightly more varied, as seen in Figure 13. Meanwhile, Class 8 contains 61 images, and it is the most diverse of the three (as visible in Figure 14. However, the representativeness of Class 8’s Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 15 Fig. 10 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 4 (Digital superpositions over cityscapes or skylines). Fig. 11 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 5 (Physical-digital hybrid workspaces). Fig. 12 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 6 (Abstract patterns). heat-map is limited by the content of the images, namely incoherent alphanu- merical symbols or programming languages on a dark background. We expect that the variation in the heat-map reflects the wide variety of colours used in these different symbols, despite larger compositional similarities. Figure 3 highlights some examples from Classes 6, 7, and 8. 5 Discussion In this section we argue that the aesthetic classes established in the previous section can help to prime readers’ interpretations of associated texts in ways that affect their self-efficacy. Insofar as the images that accompany cyber secu- rity texts are created and selected for this specific purpose (that is, for inclusion Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 16 Article Title in these texts), we may say that the observed aesthetic trends are more or less deliberate attempts to frame cyber security in a certain manner. Accordingly, we begin with an analysis of the semantics of cyber security — the colours, shapes, and devices used throughout the image-set — to understand how cyber security is being framed. We proceed to analyse the image classes that feature objects, people, and places. We finish this section by framing these discussions in light of our research aims and what we learnt in Section 2. 5.1 The visual vocabulary of cyber security Our image-set suggests that cyber security exists at the limits of traditional human visibility. Indeed, many of the image classes feature abstractions of objects, situations, individuals, and landscapes rather than concrete subjects. This seems consistent with typical evocations of ‘cyberspace’ — a term coined in 1982 by science-fiction writer William Gibson [59] to designate ‘a new uni- verse’ parallel to the physical but created by the digital [60] (as encapsulated in the ‘fifth branch’ metaphor utilised by the U.S. military [61]). Although the term has since become synonymous with global computer networks such as the Internet, it continues to encapsulate the ‘sublime’ sensations associated with a new frontier. [62] explained that, when users are introduced to power- ful new technologies (such as cyberspace or a digital system), they experience a pleasurable yet terrifying sensation that alerts them to the limits of their reality. Multiple scholars have explored how aesthetic choices can help to acclimate users to the new reality of cyberspace ‘environments’. [63], for instance, argued that aesthetics help to evoke imagery of life in the domain of cyberspace, while [64] explained that imagery can provide insight into a domain and help to cul- tivate a form of spatial awareness within it. Within our image-set, we observed heavy use of mathematical aesthetics such as concentric arcs, simple and tileable shapes (such as hexagons, albeit with a higher area-to-perimeter ratio), and connecting lines. Where these devices construct the shape of cyberspace, colour establishes its tone. In our image-set, we observed a preponderance of dark shades and blue hues. This is consistent with the work of [65], who researched the use of colour within the domain of science fiction. One possible reason for this preference in science fiction and cyber security is the relative rar- ity of blues in nature [66]; because this colour is scarce in our physical domain, it effectively communicates cyberspace’s distinction from the straightforwardly physical and natural. Of the aesthetic classes identified in our image-set, the ones that most optimally represent cyberspace as a techno-spatial domain separate from, but parallel to, our physical reality are Classes 3, 6 and 8, which represent 16% of our total image-set. These classes deploy the aforementioned aesthetic tactics most consistently / legibly. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 17 Fig. 13 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 7 (Textual content such as explicit warnings). Fig. 14 Heat-map highlighting the overall colour differences between images in Class 8 (Wall of code). 5.2 Physical traditional security semiotics [67] argue that semiotics researchers are mainly interested in understanding how individual signs, objects, and concepts coalesce into a coherent visual narrative. Objects such as locks, shields, and keys appeared frequently in our image-set, either as digital manifestations of physical objects or, in rare cases, as physical objects in a hybridised physical-digital environment. These objects represent 20% of the total image-set, and a selection can be found in Figure 2. As these objects often pre-date the development of cyberspace, they may initially evoke physical, rather than digital, security, being grafted onto cyber security only later to represent what security might mean in cyberspace. As is the case with skeuomorphic interface design, wherein new signs or symbols are developed from prior objects (retaining the original’s ornamental design cues), the new semiotic interpretation may have superseded the older meaning. Nonetheless, any theoretical constructs associated with the originator sign have likely been carried forward [68]. According to [24], security could be seen as a form of negation, with secu- rity signs suggesting the absence of malicious activity. The lock is a powerful symbol of security in the real world, the key a symbol of legitimate authority, and the shield a symbol indicating defense in the event of an attack. These Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 18 Article Title symbols can also be rendered differently to present a kind of advanced warn- ing system; imagery of a broken lock, key, or shield might alert the user to potential security infractions.6 5.3 Hackers: anatomy, gender, and race Humans were represented in 16.4% of the images in our image-set. Using our codebook, we assigned each of these images to one of two binary categories: the malicious hackerman archetype (8% of our total image-set, and just over 52% of our total human representations) or non-malicious users (7.8% of our total image-set, and just under 48% of our total human representations). An additional 4% of our image-set contained anatomical images, such as those seen in Class 9. These anatomical images were largely restricted to two types: those featuring hands and those featuring eyes. Our image-set broadly suggests a lack of equal representation in cyber security aesthetics, and thus a lack of diverse role models. Just under 1% of our hackerman archetype features feminine-presenting people; all others were either masculine-presenting (63%), implied to be men, or had their secondary- sex characteristics obscured (for instance, by a mask). While we do see a wider variety of individuals amongst the non-malicious users — 63% of these images contained masculine-presenting individuals, 37% contained feminine- presenting individuals, and 20% contained people who appeared to be of a non-white background — this does not necessarily represent the gender or racial/ethnic background ratio of audiences who engage with cyber security content, but that of the organisations that produce cyber security digital media (as per Thomas’s [69] concept of a ‘discursive digital archive’).7 Our image-set also seems to attribute disparate expertise — and thus responsibility for cyber security — to different individuals. The hackerman, for instance, is presented as a ‘lone wolf’, whereas non-malicious individuals are more frequently depicted in groups than as solo actors.8 One could interpret this to mean that individuals lack the talents or other requisite knowledge that the lone hackerman possesses [71], and must therefore work together to counter the hackerman’s threats. The media promotes this association by applying the hackerman stereotype to organisations such as ‘Anonymous’ and online com- munities such as 4chan, placing these groups in a position to dominate the conversation. In turn, individual users may view these entities as malicious experts, abdicating their own responsibility for cyber security based on their feelings of powerlessness [71]. Finally, our image-set features moral ambiguity and vague representations that could make it difficult for users to derive context from images. For exam- ple, while the hackerman is supposed to engage in malicious online activities, 6It must be pointed out, however, that we did not come across any broken or damaged semiotic objects in our image-set. 7Statistics from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics indicate that 18% of cyber security special- ists are women [70], which may provide a reference point for the 37% of human images featuring feminine-presenting people. 8This is particularly pronounced in images featuring feminine-presenting people, who in many cases are accompanied by masculine-presenting people. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 19 he is sometimes presented with morally ambiguous or vigilante imagery like the ‘V for Vendetta’ mask, complicating the viewer’s understanding of his aims. While non-malicious individuals are consistently depicted as benign or neutral, they are frequently engaged in a variety of nondescript tasks, like interacting with hacked devices, responding to being hacked, or performing some kind of professional work (for instance, as cyber security professionals). Images of human anatomy were similar; though hands are an important and highly visible part of the human body [72] that can serve as a heuristic to facil- itate learning [73],9 in our image-set they were engaged in a variety of mostly unclear / un-directed movements and positions, often in connection with phys- ical devices like laptops. Images in which the eye was dominant were similarly varied, but in many cases represented the moral ambiguity of a panopticon (alongside images from other classes that render a retina and cornea from composite imagery) or enjoined the user to pay attention [74]. By depriving users of role models, clear contexts / goals, and the means or abilities to achieve such goals, these issues likely undermine individual users’ self-efficacy. We believe that these issues stem, at least in part, from cyber security’s reliance on stock photography. Stock photography is characteristi- cally nondescript and visually homogeneous because it must make individual images salient to various use cases — hence the images of individuals in vague contexts and unclear narratives. Furthermore, stock photography in western media features a ‘discrimination implied by a well-calculated, almost mandatory inclusion of gender and ethnic minorities’ [75], yielding the nom- inally inclusive images that nonetheless fail to actually bestow agency to the individuals represented. 5.4 Digital-Physical spheres Representing 7% of our total image-set, hybrid digital-physical representations, such as digital networks superimposed over cityscapes, the earth, or a more abstract sphere, were of some note to us. To understand what these images mean and how they may affect self-efficacy, we consulted work in other domains that use similar styles of visualisation. Most prominently, Sloterdijk, a Ger- man philosopher, studied the history of spherical maps, overlays, and designs, tracing these visual tactics as far back as the late 15th Century [76]. Sloterdijk argues that these kinds of images arose naturally from our changing under- standing of our planet at that time, which was no longer an enclosed space or the centre of the universe, but a single, contingent celestial body. According to this account, disoriented European map makers began to fetishise spherical imagery as a sense-making device capable of conveying that we were no longer living inside a world, but rather on one. Although the overlays in our image-set differ from these earlier precedents in that they overlay networked security graphs instead of shipping lanes, they may nonetheless embody a return to such ‘spheric-security’ in the face of new metaphysical uncertainties, at least from an aesthetic viewpoint [76]. Indeed, a 9Hands are often used to model movements or convey information by assuming specific positions. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 20 Article Title subconscious spheric-security can also be seen in images outside our image-set like network traffic maps, which often take a spherical view despite not being technically constrained in this manner. According to [77], spherical shapes suggest something which can be contained and kept secure, and so they may help to imaginatively ‘bound’ the sprawling endlessness of Network traffic, which always threatens to deviate into the unknown. 5.5 Trends and Recommendations In the above, we explored the attributes of cyber security aesthetics and speculated about the kind of self-efficacy that these attributes afford. In the following, we highlight the trends we observed across classes and the key issues that cyber security aesthetics must address to improve its effect on users’ self-efficacy. 5.5.1 A practical philosophy for cyber security According to the philosophical discourse on aesthetics presented in Section 2, aesthetics provide a basis for savoring sensation, organising sensations into orderly meaning [27], and orienting contexts [78]. Moreover, the meanings and contexts thus constructed can influence our decisions [35]. While cyber secu- rity aesthetics seem to fulfil the first element of sensation, adapting a long history of mathematical and even science fiction aesthetics (alongside other disciplinary symbols) to frame cyberspace as an other-worldly future domain that is not restricted to what we currently understand, they fail to provide sufficient context for effective navigation or learning. Instead, they present a dazzling spectacle of abstractions and powerful traditional security semiotics without much in the way of meaning. The hackerman archetype, powerful but elusive, and our other subjects involved in procedural and ambiguous work, encourage users to abdicate responsibility based on their own comparative lack of expertise and perceived powerlessness, while the digital-physical spheres, like Sloterdijk’s historical spheres, reify a world that may not match our experience of reality. According to Sloterdijk, humans no longer believe in an all-seeing singularity encompassing us, be it supernatural or human exceptionalism [76]. Nonetheless, much user-facing cyber security media depicts cyberspace as a fraught and hostile environment that individuals can’t hope to navigate with- out expert assistance, a strategy that amounts to ‘fear-mongering’ and allows those with vested interests in the cyber security field to turn security into an all-important and all-encompassing issue [79]. Solving these problems is no simple task, and so no easy solution presents itself. One high-level, long-term suggestion is to develop a practical philosophy based on narratives. For example, [80] frame security as a form of resilience that individuals can build through everyday tasks that make them feel secure. Where the person performing these tasks is a trusted friend or confidante, security could also be framed as relational security. Breaking cyber security down into small, actionable tasks can significantly improve users’ self-efficacy, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 21 given the theory of self-efficacy presented in Section 2. It would also allow cyber security aesthetics to play a positive role, enabling individuals and society at large to navigate the rapidly changing digital-physical world represented in our image-set. This possibility could be realised through new and innovative semiotics that are not simply copies of the traditional security landscape, or through a more positivist and standardised form of low-abstracted relational imagery with clear links to cyberspace. A practical example of this can be found in refuse recycling, where Gary Anderson, a student, won a nationwide contest for a new symbol for the then fledgling recycling initiative with his Mobius loop-based three-chasing-arrows. This symbol has since risen to global prominence [81]. 5.5.2 Improving role models for cyber security Systemic under-representation in certain occupations is a complex and multi- causal problem that needs to be examined using both interdisciplinary and context-specific approaches.10 Fortunately, we can begin to bolster all users’ self-efficacy through much more straightforward steps.11 For example, insofar as stereotypes can have positive self-efficacy effects in certain contexts [82],12 we could co-opt the male-dominated hackerman stereotype and make it more inclusive, extending its connotations of moral ambiguity and power to indi- viduals across demographics. We believe that such role models can help to reduce users’ cognitive load when assimilating cyber security knowledge, and that they can make the field as a whole seem more user-friendly. 5.5.3 The paradox of simplification In the world of user interface design, developers build persuasive and easy- to-use interfaces to pursue a kind of universal simplicity. This objective could also be applied to cyber security aesthetics, where it could help to magnify users’ self-efficacy. For instance, cyber security aesthetics could become sim- pler, cleaner, and more pertinent to the subject matter, or they could feature more rhetorical imagery. Where the digital workspaces, networked landscapes, text walls, and semiotic padlocks in our image-set all pose exploratory ques- tions (prompting internal narrative reflection), rhetorical imagery makes a specific point, is designed with a specific audience in mind, and is focused on narrative integrity above all. Of course, the problem is not just about exploratory imagery; we have seen that cyber security aesthetics feature many abstractions and visual devices that confuse the core concept being depicted. If cyber security aesthetics are supposed to simplify the complex nature of cyber security, it appears that we 10These approaches must also account for under-representation at multiple phases / points in time, including factors that influence the admission, participation, and progression of under- represented individuals in these industries. 11In our case, self-efficacy is linked to the context in which these images are used for informally learnt cyber security. 12In the field of education, positive stereotypes have been shown to influence which goals individuals choose to pursue [82]. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 22 Article Title must first simplify the aesthetics themselves. However, simplification can itself lead to misunderstanding, as was the case in the Space Shuttle disaster, which was partially attributable to the oversimplification of data in a graph [83]. This is the cyber security aesthetic paradox: that simplification can aid as well as hinder understanding in equal measure. To overcome this challenge, we might look to other fields that have developed unique aesthetic norms that enhance learners’ self-efficacy. The field of chemistry, for instance, has spent centuries developing a standard aesthetic system that simplifies complex concepts and narratives without rendering them ineffective [84]. 6 Limitations and future research directions The scope of this study was limited by the definitions we used and the selec- tion criteria we applied to guide our assembly of the image-set. In our case, this meant focusing on English-language material even though a preliminary search conducted before implementation unearthed a rich catalogue of images in other languages. This also means that our analysis and our findings likely exhibit Anglo-Saxon bias. Nevertheless, we expect that our methodology can be adapted to explore the same research aims in other languages and cultural contexts, enabling a more universal understanding of cyber security aesthetics. Given the background we provided in Section 2, our definition of aesthetics likely exhibits Anglo-Saxon or broadly Euro-American bias, failing to encap- sulate the aesthetic philosophies of other cultures. It may also be limiting for other reasons, as we focused narrowly on their ability to provide context for, and inlays to, the world of cyberspace, making it more interpretable and navi- gable for informal learners. Other definitions might yield different insights and support other kinds of research questions. We utilised semi-automated methodologies to classify images based on the semiotic objects within them, and the results are tempered by the respective limitations of these methodologies. Moreover, our results represent a specific snapshot in the security timeline; access to a larger historical image-set would inevitably change the overall results, potentially yielding a more statistically significant sentiment analysis. Furthermore, in order to assemble a unique image-set, we ignored duplicates. However, insofar as aesthetic literacies arise from exposure to images, rather than the absolute number of unique images, including duplicates could help us to ascertain the effective rate of gender representation, as perceived by viewers. This study was exploratory, and we predicted how users’ self-efficacy might be affected by images through a singular focus on qualitative analysis. We did not consider other metrics that could have enhanced the findings, and we did not engage in other kinds of data collection (like surveys) that could have revealed real users’ reactions. Traditionally speaking, image recognition assessments in lab settings involve comprehension tests, eye tracking, and brain-imaging. Knowledge of how users interact with cyber security aesthetics Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 23 in these terms would allow for a significantly richer analysis of aesthetic effects on self-efficacy. Finally, because self-efficacy is a fluid construct that may vary based on specific emotional awareness and specific tasks or contexts [85], future research in this field could assess the emotional associations of more granular aes- thetic elements, like each colour within each image class. For example, [86] crowd-sourced an inventory of colour-word associations that reveal the spe- cific emotions attached to specific colours, which could be used to analyse the colour trends in our image-set. All of these limitations present myriad opportunities to expand on this work, perfecting our understanding of cyber security aesthetics and the effects it can have on cyberspace and its users. 7 Conclusion In this paper we have presented work on an image-set of cyber security aesthet- ics generated from mainstream media articles as might be faced by individual users on a regular basis. The work was oriented by two aims: (1) to ascertain what cyber security aesthetics consist of, from the perspective of an individual user, and (2) to provide an explorative discussion as to the manner in which these aesthetics may affect users’ perceived self-efficacy as they informally learn cyber security precepts. Our findings for (1) indicate that cyber security aesthetics depict a threatening and confusing environment with systemic semiotic and social defi- ciencies — a distorted vision of cyberspace without clarity of thought. The narrative of cyber security is abstract and opaque, but through informal learn- ing, individual users can assemble a mental representation of this concept, using their senses to intuit meaning and perspective from the visual elements that accompany cyber security texts. For (2) our findings raise important obstacles to self-efficacy potential, from the way that participants of cyberspace are portrayed to the moral ambiguity that characterises a significant proportion of the image-set. Nonetheless, as cyber security continues to evolve into a core concept within cyberspace, we believe that these issues can be overcome. Indeed, several of these problems, and the simplification paradox itself, arise from a lack of vision, or perhaps just the lack of usable semiotics available to cyber security content creators. We believe the work represents the first steps in working towards a more holistic and cohesive cyber security aesthetic vision. Statements and Declarations All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Material prepa- ration and data collection were performed by [Mark Quinlan]. Initial data analysis of the image-set were performed by [Mark Quinlan] and [Aaron Ceross], with all further analysis performed by [Mark Quinlan]. The first draft Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 24 Article Title of the manuscript was written by [Mark Quinlan] and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript, and have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. References [1] Lin, F., Yao, M.: The impact of accompanying text on visual processing and hedonic evaluation of art. Empirical Studies of the Arts 36(2), 180– 198 (2018) [2] Hattwig, D., Bussert, K., Medaille, A., Burgess, J.: Visual literacy stan- dards in higher education: New opportunities for libraries and student learning. portal: Libraries and the Academy 13(1), 61–89 (2013) [3] Nichols, J.: Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century vol. 8. Nichols; Bentley, ??? (1858) [4] Marland, A.: Political photography, journalism, and framing in the digital age: The management of visual media by the prime minister of canada. The International Journal of Press/Politics 17(2), 214–233 (2012) [5] Cooper, N., Holman, V.: War and visual culture since 1900. Journal of War & Culture Studies 1(3), 219–222 (2008) [6] Meyer, B., Verrips, J.: Aesthetics. Routledge, ??? (2008) [7] David, A., Glore, P.: The impact of design and aesthetics on usabil- ity, credibility, and learning in an online environment. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 13(4) (2010) [8] Mitchell, C., Weber, S., O’Reilly-Scanlon, K.: Just who do we think we are. Methodologies for (2005) [9] Page, T.: Skeuomorphism or flat design: future directions in mobile device user interface (ui) design education. International Journal of Mobile Learning and Organisation 8(2), 130–142 (2014) [10] Curtis, A.: Rhetoric of Flat Design and Skeuomorphism in Apple’s iOS Graphical User Interface. University of Rhode Island, ??? (2015) [11] Tharangie, K., Irfan, C., Marasinghe, C., Yamada, K.: Kansei engi- neering assessing system to enhance the usability in e-learning web interfaces: Colour basis. In: 16th International Conference on Computers in Education, vol. 1, pp. 145–150 (2008) Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 25 [12] Reyna, J.: The importance of visual design and aesthetics in e-learning. Training and Development 40(5), 28–31 (2013) [13] Malcolm, J., Hodkinson, P., Colley, H.: The interrelationships between informal and formal learning. Journal of Workplace Learning (2003). https://doi.org/10.1108/13665620310504783 [14] Ollis, T.: Learning in social action: The informal and social learning dimensions of circumstantial and lifelong activists. Australian Journal of Adult Learning 51(2), 248–268 (2011) [15] Flavi´an, C., Gurrea, R., Or´us, C.: A heuristic evaluation of websites design for achieving the web success. International Journal of Services and Standards 5(1), 17–41 (2009) [16] Joshi, D., Datta, R., Fedorovskaya, E., Luong, Q.-T., Wang, J.Z., Li, J., Luo, J.: Aesthetics and emotions in images. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 28(5), 94–115 (2011) [17] Shires, J.: Cyber-noir: Cybersecurity and popular culture. Contemporary Security Policy 41(1), 82–107 (2020) [18] Carroll, F.: Usable security and aesthetics: Designing for engaging online security warnings and cautions to optimise user security whilst affording ease of use. In: European Symposium on Usable Security 2021, pp. 23–28 (2021) [19] Fogg, B.J.: A behavior model for persuasive design. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology, pp. 1–7 (2009) [20] Robinson, L., Schulz, J., Blank, G., Ragnedda, M., Ono, H., Hogan, B., Mesch, G., Cotten, S.R., Kretchmer, S.B., Hale, T.M., et al.: Digital inequalities 2.0: Legacy inequalities in the information age (2020) [21] Alsudani, F., Casey, M.: The effect of aesthetics on web credibility. Peo- ple and Computers XXIII Celebrating People and Technology, 512–519 (2009) [22] Ma, K.-L.: Cyber security through visualization. In: Proceedings of the 2006 Asia-Pacific Symposium on Information Visualisation-Volume 60, pp. 3–7 (2006). Citeseer [23] Bernal, V.: 1. the aesthetics of cyber insecurity: Displaying the digital in three american museum exhibits. In: Futureproof, pp. 33–62. Duke University Press, ??? (2020) [24] Ghertner, D.A., McFann, H., Goldstein, D.M.: Futureproof: Security Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 26 Article Title Aesthetics and the Management of Life. Duke University Press, ??? (2020) [25] Dewey, J.: Art as experience. New York: wideview. Pedigree Books (1934) [26] Beardsley, M.C.: Aesthetics from Classical Greece to the Present vol. 13. University of Alabama Press, ??? (1975) [27] Kant, I.: The Critique of Judgment. Prometheus Books, ??? (1892) [28] Zander, T., ¨Ollinger, M., Volz, K.G.: Intuition and insight: Two processes that build on each other or fundamentally differ? Frontiers in Psychology 7, 1395 (2016) [29] Walsh, D.: Aesthetic objects and works of art. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 33(1), 7–12 (1974) [30] Wissenburg, I.: Aesthetic communication on the possibility of combining semiotics and aesthetics: analysis of ‘delftsche slaolie’by jan toorop. B.S. thesis, Universiteit Utrecht (2012) [31] Barbosa, S.D.J., Barbosa, G.D.J., Souza, C.S.d., Leit˜ao, C.F.: A semiotics-based epistemic tool to reason about ethical issues in digital technology design and development. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 363–374 (2021) [32] Cheng, L., Pei, J., Danesi, M.: A sociosemiotic interpretation of cyber- security in u.s. legislative discourse. Social Semiotics 29(3), 286–302 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1080/10350330.2019.1587843. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/10350330.2019.1587843 [33] Sayers, S.: Jacques ranci`ere (2004) the politics of aesthetics: the distribu- tion of the sensible. Culture Machine, Reviews (2005) [34] Rudner, R.: On semiotic aesthetics. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 10(1), 67–77 (1951) [35] Chatterjee, A.: The Aesthetic Brain: How We Evolved to Desire Beauty and Enjoy Art. Oxford University Press, ??? (2014) [36] Carper, B.A.: Fundamental Patterns of Knowing in Nursing. Teachers College, Columbia University, ??? (1975) [37] Keenan, T.M.: The use of aesthetic knowledge in decision making pro- cesses in mega projects. PhD thesis, Queensland University of Technology (2016) [38] Carroll, F.: Designing (for) experiences in photorealistic vr environments. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 27 New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 16(1-2), 181–194 (2010) [39] Fernandes, M., Walls, L., Munson, S., Hullman, J., Kay, M.: Uncertainty displays using quantile dotplots or cdfs improve transit decision-making. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–12 (2018) [40] Rader, E., Wash, R., Brooks, B.: Stories as informal lessons about security. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, pp. 1–17 (2012) [41] Bandura, A., Freeman, W.H., Lightsey, R.: Self-efficacy: The Exercise of Control. Springer, ??? (1999) [42] Maddux, J.E.: Self-efficacy theory. In: Self-efficacy, Adaptation, and Adjustment, pp. 3–33. Springer, ??? (1995) [43] Stumpf, S.A., Brief, A.P., Hartman, K.: Self-efficacy expectations and coping with career-related events. Journal of Vocational Behavior 31(1), 91–108 (1987) [44] Herley, C.E.: So long, and no thanks for the externalities: The rational rejection of security advice by users. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on New Security Paradigms Workshop. NSPW ’09, pp. 133–144. Associa- tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2009). https://doi. org/10.1145/1719030.1719050. https://doi.org/10.1145/1719030.1719050 [45] Halevi, T., Memon, N., Lewis, J., Kumaraguru, P., Arora, S., Dagar, N., Aloul, F., Chen, J.: Cultural and psychological factors in cyber-security. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications and Services, pp. 318–324 (2016) [46] Ajzen, I.: The theory of planned behaviour. organizational behaviour and human decision processes, 50 (2), 179-211. View at (1991) [47] Bosma, N., Hessels, J., Schutjens, V., Van Praag, M., Verheul, I.: Entrepreneurship and role models. Journal of economic psychology 33(2), 410–424 (2012) [48] Marres, N., Weltevrede, E.: Scraping the social? issues in live social research. Journal of Cultural Economy 6(3), 313–335 (2013). https://doi. org/10.1080/17530350.2013.772070 [49] Schatz, D., Bashroush, R., Wall, J.: Towards a more representative def- inition of cyber-security. Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law 12(2), 53–74 (2017). https://doi.org/10.15394/jdfsl.2017.1476 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 28 Article Title [50] Humayun, M., Niazi, M., Jhanjhi, N., Alshayeb, M., Mahmood, S.: Cyber- security threats and vulnerabilities: a systematic mapping study. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering 45(4), 3171–3189 (2020) [51] Kosar, T., Bohra, S., Mernik, M.: Protocol of a systematic mapping study for domain-specific languages. Journal of Information and Software Technology 21(C), 77–91 (2016) [52] Csurka, G., Dance, C., Fan, L., Willamowski, J., Bray, C.: Visual catego- rization with bags of keypoints. In: Workshop on Statistical Learning in Computer Vision, ECCV, vol. 1, pp. 1–2 (2004). Prague [53] Weller, H.I., Westneat, M.W.: Quantitative color profiling of digital images with earth mover’s distance using the R package colordistance. PeerJ 7, 6398 (2019) [54] Rubner, Y., Tomasi, C., Guibas, L.J.: The earth mover’s distance as a met- ric for image retrieval. International Journal of Computer Vision 40(2), 99–121 (2000) [55] Gupta, A., Thakkar, K., Gandhi, V., Narayanan, P.: Nose, eyes and ears: Head pose estimation by locating facial keypoints. In: ICASSP 2019- 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1977–1981 (2019). IEEE [56] W¨aldchen, J., M¨ader, P.: Plant species identification using computer vision techniques: A systematic literature review. Archives of Computa- tional Methods in Engineering 25(2), 507–543 (2018) [57] Samek, W., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., M¨uller, K.-R.: Evaluating the visualization of what a deep neural network has learned. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28(11), 2660– 2673 (2016) [58] Johnson, M.R.: The history of cyberspace aesthetics in video games. In: Cyberpunk and Visual Culture, pp. 139–154. Routledge, ??? (2017) [59] Gibson, W.: Neuromancer vol. 1. Aleph, ??? (1984) [60] Benedikt, M.L.: Cyberspace: First Steps. MIT Press, ??? (1991) [61] Branch, J.: What’s in a name? metaphors and cybersecurity. Inter- national Organization 75(1), 39–70 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1017/ S002081832000051X [62] Nye, D.E.: American Technological Sublime. mit Press, ??? (1996) Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Article Title 29 [63] Featherstone, M., Burrows, R.: Cyberspace/cyberbodies/cyberpunk: Cul- tures of Technological Embodiment. Sage, ??? (1996) [64] Croon, A.: Making sense of cyberspace: a question of being-with informa- tion technology. In: Exploring Cyber Society, pp. 1–9 (1999). Univeristy of Northumbria at Newcastle [65] Shedroff, N., Noessel, C.: Make It So: Interaction Design Lessons from Science Fiction. Rosenfeld Media, ??? (2012) [66] Greenspan, S.: Future screens are mostly blue (2013). https:// 99percentinvisible.org/episode/future-screens-are-mostly-blue/ [67] Beasley, R., Danesi, M.: Persuasive Signs: The Semiotics of Advertising vol. 4. Walter de Gruyter, ??? (2010) [68] Kearney, R., Rasmussen, D.: Continental aesthetics: Romanticism to postmodernism: An anthology (2001) [69] Thomas, P.: Discursive trick effects: How raced and gendered semiotics in industry media undermine equal representation in the cybersecurity workforce (2020) [70] Jethwani, M.M., Memon, N., Seo, W., Richer, A.: “i can actually be a super sleuth” promising practices for engaging adolescent girls in cyber- security education. Journal of Educational Computing Research 55(1), 3–25 (2017) [71] Sob, T.: “hackerman”: How diverging cyberspace portrayals influence the adf’s perception of cybersecurity and the cultural ramifications of these judgements. Australian Defense Force - Cyber Security Challenges 1(1) (2021) [72] Jakubietz, R.G., Jakubietz, M.G., Kloss, D., Gruenert, J.G.: Defining the basic aesthetics of the hand. Aesthetic plastic surgery 29(6), 546–551 (2005) [73] Goldin-Meadow, S., Wagner, S.M.: How our hands help us learn. Trends in cognitive sciences 9(5), 234–241 (2005) [74] Gaines, B.: Machinic eyes: New and post-digital aesthetics, surveillance, and resistance. PhD thesis, Clemson University (2019) [75] Papadopoulou, A.: As seen in your prospectus: A critical essay on the representation of ethnic diversity in stock photography (2014) [76] Sloterdijk, P.: Spheres volume i: Bubbles microspherology. Los Angeles: Semiotext (e) (2011) Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 30 Article Title [77] Hall, P., Heath, C., Coles-Kemp, L.: Critical visualization: a case for rethinking how we visualize risk and security. Journal of Cybersecurity 1(1), 93–108 (2015) https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article- pdf/1/1/93/7001223/tyv004.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/ tyv004 [78] Kikuchi, J.F., Simmons, H.: Philosophic inquiry in nursing (1992) [79] Neocleous, M.: Critique of Security. Edinburgh University Press, ??? (2008) [80] McSweeney, W., Bill, M.: Security, Identity and Interests: a Sociology of International Relations vol. 69. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ??? (1999) [81] Jones, P., Powell, J.: Gary anderson has been found! Resource Recycling 18, 25–27 (1999) [82] Czopp, A.M., Kay, A.C., Cheryan, S.: Positive stereotypes are perva- sive and powerful. Perspectives on Psychological Science 10(4), 451–463 (2015) [83] Tufte, E.R.: Beautiful Evidence. Graphis Pr, ??? (2006) [84] Hoffmann, R.: Thoughts on aesthetics and visualization in chemistry. HYLE–International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry 9(1), 7–10 (2003) [85] Karademas, E.C., Kafetsios, K., Sideridis, G.D.: Optimism, self-efficacy and information processing of threat-and well-being-related stimuli. Stress and Health: Journal of the International Society for the Investigation of Stress 23(5), 285–294 (2007) [86] Mohammad, S.: Colourful language: Measuring word-colour associations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.5942 (2013)