The Evolution of Keylogger Technologies: A Survey from Historical Origins to Emerging Opportunities Marco Salas-Nino1, Grant Ritter1, Daniel Hamdan1, Tao Wang2, and Tao Hou1 1Texas State University, {mas740, hvx1, orw17, taohou}@txstate.edu 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, twang27@charlotte.edu Abstract As the digital world evolves, so do the threats to our security do too. Keyloggers were once a large threat to the cyber world. Though under- going many transformations alongside the tech- nological advancements of today, it is important to raise questions about the importance of Anti- Keyloggers in our current state of cyber security. This survey dives into the historical evolution of Keyloggers and investigates their current day forms. Within this inspection of Keyloggers, we must propose whether Anti-Keyloggers serve a purpose to this ever-changing landscape before us or if emerging strategies have rendered them obsolete. 1 Introduction It is well known that humans are the weakest link in cybersecurity. With users passing through multiple sites a session, they are bound to pick up unwanted malware/spyware by mis- take which can lead to all sorts of information being stolen. One of these software's is called a Keylogger. Keyloggers stay hidden on a victim’s computer stealing their keyboard’s inputs. This data can be used to find valuable information and passwords. With the internet becoming in- creasingly important for day-to-day use, the se- curity behind it is ever increasing. As of 2023, we have reached leaps and bounds to strive to protect our information to the best of our ability and that leaves us with our two questions: do Keyloggers pose a threat anymore? More im- portantly, do Anti-Keyloggers serve a purpose to us in the future? 2 Keylogger Technologies Keyloggers are tools used to record keystrokes and user activity on a computer [2, 11]. One of the fundamental ways a keylogger records a user’s activity is recording everything a user types, however there are a lot of distinct types of keyloggers that record different things. There are software and hardware keyloggers. Which- ever keylogger an individual has they all aim for the same objective. Recording what the user typed or did on his or her computer and report the information back to the attacker. Our goal here is to bring awareness of keyloggers and un- derstand the dangers a keylogger can bring. 2.1 Hardware Keyloggers Figure 1 Hardware Keylogger USB Connector A regular hardware keylogger logs keystrokes using a hardware circuit that attaches between the computer and the keyboard [9]. All infor- mation that attempts to flow from the keyboard to the computer passes through the hardware, allowing the information to be stored in internal memory. The advantages of a hardware logger come from its ability to run independently from the computer and its operating system. This al- lows for the Keylogger to avoid interference with any machine software and gives anti-mal- ware a much harder time to detect it. Firmware- based keyloggers is a BIOS-level firmware re- sulting from modifications to record process events. This can be physical or root-level access which is required for the machine. The software loaded into the BIOS needs to be created for the specific hardware the machine uses. Wireless keyboard/mouse sniffers are passive data collec- tors that try to take any data signals passed between wireless devices and the computer. To prevent this sort of hardware tampering, en- cryption is typically used to hide the data passed between the devices. The last trick these sniffers typically contain is the ability to enter com- mands into a victim’s computer. This bypasses the encryption entirely due to it no longer ex- clusively snatching data. 2.1.2 Software Keyloggers Figure 2 Software Keylogger Path Software keyloggers do not require any physical device to gain access to a device. Users may ac- cidentally download this software through surf- ing the web. With many methods of picking up one of these software, there are different meth- ods this software uses to gather a victim’s data [33]. Form-Grabbing software Keyloggers gather data entered into a field. Rather than be- ing directly downloaded to a victim’s computer, this type of software is deployed on a website. An attacker may use a Form-Grabbing Keylog- ger on a malicious site which prompts the user to enter login information. JavaScript keylog- gers, written in JavaScript, are injected into websites. This software records events when- ever you press a key within the application. Kernal-based Keyloggers work their way into the system’s core for admin-level access. These loggers can then bypass any restrictions to access data entered into a user’s system. API-based keyloggers directly take the data sent between the signals sent from each keypress to the cur- rent program. Since Application programming interfaces (APIs) allow developers and hardware manufacturers to integrate their products, API keyloggers intercept this information to log the data sent elsewhere. 2.2 How can you accidentally obtain a Software Keylogger? Just like many different forms of malware/spy- ware, Keyloggers can be obtained by accident in similar ways [1]. Spear phishing or fake email is one of the easiest ways for hackers to deliver Keyloggers into a victim's computer. Hackers will often try to attach malware containing their methods of attack to emails and mass deliver them to random victim’s hoping that any of them trigger their trap. Even the simple act of opening the email may be enough to trigger these attacks. Installing suspicious software is another way of contracting a Keylogger. By em- bedding Keyloggers into seemingly trustworthy software, hackers can collect the information from the victim’s computer like any other Keylogger. Due to the escalating number of ap- plications that users download to their devices; they are bound to eventually pick up some form of spyware. Phishing links are infected links that redirect you to unwanted websites. Users can encounter these URLs countless times while surfing the web. Once a victim visits one of these infected websites, a keylogger can latch onto their system within a few seconds installing the spyware. Finally, Drive by Downloads are a common way to get a Keylogger attached to your system. Like Phishing links, this can install spyware to your device. This can be done by ac- cidentally passing by an infected site while you busy yourself by browsing the web. 3 Keylogger Evolution Keyloggers are not a new form of data collection. Although Keyloggers are a much more advanced threat now, there was still a point where the idea had to come from. It is with the evolution of technology and the internet that attackers had to also evolve their attacks alongside it. 3.1 Selectric Bug The first recorded keylogger was in the 1970s. The Soviet Union wanted to get information in- side the U.S. embassy [32], but they had one ob- stacle. How can they get consistent information and not waste endless number of spies? At the time there were no computers, there were just electric typewriters. This is when the Soviet Un- ion developed a hardware keylogging device for electric typewriters. It was called the Selectric bug. The selectric bug tracked the movements of the printhead by measuring the magnetic field released by the movements of the printhead [32]. This keylogger specifically targeted the IBM electric typewriter the ones that were used by U.S. diplomats in the U.S. embassy. In addi- tion, it was also used to consulate buildings in St. Petersburg and Moscow. The Soviet Union spied and gathered information using this device and it worked for a few years up until 1984. Soon as they caught on, they found Selectric bugs on six- teen typewriters. 3.2 Perry Kivolowitz In 1983 another keylogger was made by Perry Kivolowitz [32]. Specifically, it was a software keylogger that located and dumped character lists in a Unix kernel. As the years passed keylog- gers have been growing and began to broaden around the 1990s. Since then, a lot more keylog- ger malware was created. In other words, attack- ers no longer used techniques such as stealing personal data, and credit card numbers, but also targeted home users for fraud and phishing pur- poses. 3.3 Ghost Keylogger In 2000, there was a software known for being a cyber ghost and was given the name the ghost keylogger [18]. This was one of the earliest times where keyloggers were heard, creating a sense of fear. At the time, the internet was new and computer users did not know how to defend themselves from these attacks. This software was known for being in everyone’s computer. Recording their keystrokes and information. It affected individual people, and small businesses. The attackers who made this software are un- known, but they left a big print in the digital world. Affecting individuals from different re- gions across the world [18]. From a Californian learning how to use the computer to a small business in Australia. It is unspecified the exact financial damage or the number of users affected by the ghost keylogger. What is known is the new form of cyber threats. It is believed the ghost keylogger is the one that started the path for new keyloggers to be created. 3.4 Zeus Keylogger In 2007, there was a keylogger growing that set fear to those who heard it. They feared it so much it was giving the name Zeus due to the de- struction it brought. The Zeus keylogger was used by cybercriminals in an advanced orga- nized network [18]. When attackers used this keylogger they specifically targeted financial in- stitutions and random people worldwide. Finan- cial institutions like insurance companies, credit unions, brokerage firms, etc. No person was safe from this keylogger. The Zeus keylogger was re- sponsible for major implications and damage. That was around the hundreds of millions of dollars. The people who were hurt by this were in the millions. The keylogger grabbed sensitive information such as passwords, usernames, and other sensitive banking information. This in- voked feelings of distrust across the globe, the people no longer felt secure about online bank- ing. To regain the trust of the people in cyberse- curity a battle had to be fought. The battle against the Zeus keylogger is an important event in cybersecurity. Every individual in cybersecu- rity imaginable worked together from the inter- national community, cybersecurity firm, all the way to the law enforcements, to stop the Zeus network from inflicting anymore damage on in- nocent civilians. Thanks to these collaborations it allowed arrest and convictions to the attackers at fault. Many individuals who are in the cybersecurity field still remember this major event in cybersecurity history. It remains as a re- minder of the impact a keylogger has as danger- ous as Zeus can do to any person around the world. Not only people but financial institutions as well. 3.5 Nordea Bank Attack In 2007 a Swedish bank by the name Nordea got hit by one of the biggest online bank heists ever raking over $1.1 million [19]. Nordea customers said they were getting sent e-mails containing a tailor-made trojan. In other words, customers believed it was the bank sending them e-mails, it affected about 250 customers. It is believed or- ganized Russian criminals orchestrated the at- tack. They sent an Email in which it encouraged the victims to download a suspicious applica- tion. Downloading a file raking.zip that was in- fected by the Trojan. Security companies call this haxdoor.ki. A Haxdoor installs keyloggers to record keystrokes, and hides using a rootkit. The keylogger was activated once the victims tried to log in to their Nordea online banking infor- mation. However, the victims were putting their log-in and sensitive information on a false home page. The victims kept receiving error messages from the false home page. Once the attackers successfully used the keylogger they took money from the victim’s account. This attack lasted for 15 months, sending small transactions to themselves so overall they can have $1.1 mil- lion. The attackers used this strategy to not raise awareness to the victims getting robbe. Later, McAfee discovered that the log-in information went to servers in the US and Russia. The attackers are still yet to be found. A keylogger gave the attackers a once in a lifetime paycheck. 3.6 GTA V Modification Attack Mods short for modifications are software de- signs that give a fresh style and feel to a com- puter system or in other words PC. Mods play a huge role for PC gamers; they give thrills to those who enjoy gaming in the comfort of their home in front of a computer. However even keyloggers can appear in video game mods. In 2015 a mod for the game Grand Theft Auto V was uploaded to a website called GTA5- mods.com [32, 34]. The website owners and gamers were unaware of the fact there was a hid- den keylogger. It was discovered when gamers noticed suspicious behavior from the jet planes in the game. As the gamers searched their PC, they noticed an odd C# compiler program run- ning in the background, receiving, sending, and processing information across the web. It was later found that Fade.exe executable was track- ing their computer activity. Such as what the user typed and switching from one window to another. However, the GTA V mod was re- moved from the site, and the website owners apologized for the incident. 3.7 HP Laptop 2017 recall In 2017, HP laptops had a keylogger. These HP devices logged keystrokes in a file and would send them over to a debugging API [11]. Creat- ing a security breach since it allowed local users to be able to retrieve passwords and other sensi- tive data from victims. It was believed to be neg- ligent by the developers rather than intentional. In which they claimed it to be used as a debug- ging tool, thankfully though HP did a recall and fixed the situation. 4 Impacts of Keyloggers Although it may appear that keyloggers only bring negatives to the world of Cyber security, there are a few ethically ambiguous uses that may be more beneficial than harmful [15, 16]. Parental supervision is important for protecting children from accessing inappropriate sites. Par- ents can use Keylogging software to monitor their child in their online and social activities. Next, keyloggers have been used in large com- panies who need to monitor substantial amounts of employees. With full transparency of the use of keylogger to your employees, keyloggers can increase productivity by cutting wasted time by monitoring wasted time. Wasted time can occur by chatting with others online or watching en- tertainment. Monitoring employees may reduce corruption within the company by tracking bad activity. Lastly, in case there is any legal trouble within the company, keyloggers can be used as evidence for protection. At any given time, there is stored data on the happenings in a com- pany. Like previously stated, Keyloggers contain a lot of downsides to cyber security [15]. Regarding privacy invasion, Keyloggers can be used to monitor someone’s keystrokes without their consent which is a violation of their privacy. Keyloggers are a large contributor to Data Theft due to their ability to capture sensitive information, such as passwords, credit card numbers, and personalized messages. Consent and Transparency present ethical concerns for keyloggers that are used without the consent of the individual being monitored. Transparency allows for people to be aware their actions are being monitored. Next, unproperly handled keyloggers can become a security risk if they are vulnerable to attacks or if the captured data is not properly secured. Keyloggers have many Le- gal Implications, in many jurisdictions, using keyloggers without proper authorization is ille- gal. With their given ability to capture and store data, they Keyloggers have a large possibility of being misused for malicious intent. 5 Anti-Keyloggers With such an oppressive force such as Keylog- gers, we have had to produce ways to specifically target Keyloggers directly. Anti-Keyloggers are exactly as they sound as they are designed to stop Keyloggers. Anti-keyloggers are software designed in such a way that it can detect any keylogger present in the system. Specifically, it can prevent the act of Keylogging [4, 8, 23]. This protects the user from getting their keystrokes captured, so the use of an Anti-keylogger stops attackers from stealing confidential/sensitive in- formation. It is common to see these sorts of Anti-spyware programs in public machines. The two forms of detection an Anti-Keylogger soft- ware may use are Signature-based Detection and Behavior detection. Signature-based detection checks if any of the files on the computer have a similar presence to a keylogger and marks it as a threat to the computer. The disadvantage of Sig- nature-based detection is that it can only protect from listed keylogger activity. It does not stop unrecognized keyloggers. Behavioral Detection is also known as heuristic. It contains properties which enable them to identify keylogger activ- ity that could be considered as harmful to the computer. 5.1 Advantages of Anti-Keyloggers When discussing the relevance of Anti-Keylog- gers, we need to figure out what they bring to the table [36]. Firstly, Anti-Keyloggers allow the management of activities of any Keyloggers pre- sent in the system. If it identifies said Keylog- gers, then it prevents its activity from saving crucial information. Although this can be turned into a Disadvantage, it does not make an effort to identify the types of keystrokes. This means it's not able to differentiate between the legal keystroke program and illegal keystroke pro- grams. Just like how companies use Keyloggers to monitor work done, companies can use Anti- Keyloggers to keep intruders out. Depending on which Anti-Keylogger the user uses, it can pro- vide a seamless product that has no delay to the inputs from the keyboard. For users who code in C++, Anti-Keyloggers are easily integrated with C++ libraries. 5.2 Disadvantages of Anti-Keyloggers Since most Keyloggers are unable to differenti- ate between a legal keystroke program and an illegal keystroke program, it may identify the legal program as a threat [36]. This can easily be countered with a whitelist mechanic that al- lows the users to target specific programs they wish to no longer interrupt. Unfortunately, the major downside that Anti-Keyloggers contain is that they have a hard time detecting hardware Keyloggers due to their ability to act inde- pendently of the machine. 6 Discussions 6.1 The Rates of Spyware/Keyloggers Figure 3 Early look at Keyloggers Looking at early charts depicting the growth of keyloggers around the early 2000’s, Keyloggers seemed to be on the rise around 2005. According to the research of John Bambenek, an analyst at SANS institute [11], approximately 10 million computers in the US alone were infected with malicious programs that contain some sort of keylogging function. There was a clear interest shown by attackers that Keyloggers were a val- uable asset to their operations. It would be ex- pected that this trend would continue. Examining this graph from 2023 [7], we can no- tice that there is a noticeable increase of total malicious programs and potentially unwanted applications (PUA). Assuming that Keyloggers and all their forms make up a small percentage of these graphs similar to the total shown in the early 2000’s of Keyloggers. Then we can form a conclusion that Keyloggers still exhibit prob- lems even in 2023. Figure 4 Total Newly Developed Malwares 6.2 What does this mean for Anti-Keyloggers? By going through the definition, the brief his- tory of Keyloggers, and the rates at which mal- ware is created, we can determine that the con- tinuous use of Keyloggers is still an ever-evolv- ing threat that still needs solutions to prevent them. Although they may seem rather simple, they still propose a challenge to cyber security that must be dealt with. Anti-Keyloggers pre- sent a solution that specifically targets this issue that provides simple security to those who re- quire it such as public equipment services, com- panies, gamers, and users that just want security. With the ever-evolving Keyloggers, we can ex- pect Anti-Keyloggers to evolve alongside them just as Keyloggers have evolved around evolving machines. 7 Conclusions This leaves us with the questionable future of Anti-Keyloggers. Even with technology evolv- ing around us, Keyloggers will need to adapt to create new attacks. Currently, the latest devel- opment made in attacks has been the ‘BlackMamba’ keylogging attack [35]. This Keylogger is a proof-of-concept artificial intelli- gence – driven cyberattack that changes its code on the fly to slip past automated securities such as the current Anti-keyloggers of today. This technology is powered using a large language model which is a type of language model known for its ability to understand general-purpose lan- guages and language generation [37]. It is up to future developers to predict these AI Keyloggers and evolve Anti-Keyloggers to combat them. References [1] “How to Get a Keylogger?: Five Ways to Get a Keylogger on Computer.” Enterprisexcit- ium, 1 Aug. 2023, enterprise.xcit- ium.com/how-to-get-a-keylogger/. [2] Nir, Onn. “Keylogging: All You Need to Know about Keyloggers.” Reflectiz, 25 Oct. 2023, www.reflectiz.com/blog/keylogging-at- tack/. [3] Grebennikov, Nikolay, et al. “Keyloggers: How They Work and How to Detect Them (Part 1).” Securelist English Global Secure- listcom, 13 May 2021, secure- list.com/keyloggers-how-they-work-and- how-to-detect-them-part-1/36138/. [4] Manjeera, Jami Gayatri, et al. “Preventing Ma- licious Use of Keyloggers Using Anti- Keyloggers.” arXiv.Org, 15 Apr. 2023, arxiv.org/abs/2304.07594. [5] Shanmukha. “Cybersecurity: Malware: Keylogger.” Codecademy, 22 July 2023, www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cy- bersecurity/malware/keylogger. [6] Wajahat, Ahsan, et al. “(PDF) a Novel Ap- proach of Unprivileged Keylogger Detec- tion - Researchgate.” A Novel Approach of Unprivileged Keylogger Detection, Mar. 2019, www.researchgate.net/publica- tion/332013179_A_Novel_Ap- proach_of_Unprivileged_Keylogger_De- tection [7] “Malware Statistics & Trends Report: AV- TEST.” AV, 2023, www.av-test.org/en/sta- tistics/malware/. [8] “Anti-Keylogger.” GeeksforGeeks, Geeksfor- Geeks, 9 Mar. 2021, www.geeksfor- geeks.org/anti-keylogger/. [9] “Hardware Keylogger.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 17 Oct. 2023, en.wikipe- dia.org/wiki/Hardware_keylogger. [10] Waterson, Dave. “How Keyloggers Work and How to Defeat Them.” ITNOW, Oxford Uni- versity Press, 16 Feb. 2021, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti- cles/PMC7928946/. [11] Fruhlinger, Josh. “Keyloggers Explained: How Attackers Record Computer Inputs.” CSO Online, 17 May 2022, www.csoon- line.com/article/566645/keyloggers-ex- plained-how-attackers-record-computer-in- puts.html. [12] “Keystroke Interference: Professional Anti Keystroke Logging Software.” Keystroke Interference | Professional Anti Keystroke Logging Software, web.ar- chive.org/web/20100626093658/networkin- tercept.com/keystrokeinterference.html. [13] “Keyloggers: How They Work & How to De- tect Them - Crowdstrike.” Crowdstrike.Com, 2 Februrary 2023, www.crowdstrike.com/cybersecurity- 101/attack-types/keylogger/. [14] “Software Based Keylogger.” Geeksfor- Geeks, GeeksforGeeks, 5 Mar. 2021, www.geeksforgeeks.org/software-based- keylogger/. [15] Ankita. “07 Reason to Use Keystroke Log- ging in Your Workplace.” EmpMonitor, 24 Nov. 2023, empmonitor.com/blog/07-rea- sons-to-use-keystroke-logging/. [16] “Hardware Keylogger - Keygrabber USB.” Hardware Keylogger - AirDrive & KeyGrabber Keylogger - C64 PSU Power Supply, www.keelog.com/usb-keylogger/. [17] “Annual Report - First Bank & Trust | Bank- ing, Loans & Investments.” 20 Worrying Identity Theft Statistics for 2022, June 2022, www.firstbank.com/as- sets/files/mkM9XWSd/2016/03/18/An- nual%20Report_2015.pdf. [18] Moes, Tibor. “Keylogger Types (2023): The 8 Worst Examples of All Time.” Software- Lab, 2 Nov. 2023, software- lab.org/blog/keylogger-types/. [19] Zaharov-Reutt, Alex. “Nordea Bank Loses $1.14 Million to Online Fraud (Update).” iT- Wire, iTWire, 21 Jan. 2007, it- wire.com/business-it-news/security/nordea- bank-loses-$114-million-to-online-fraud- update.html. [20] “What Is a Keylogger? How to Detect a Keylogger?” Fortinet, www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglos- sary/what-is-keyloggers. [21] Latto, Nica. “What Are Keyloggers and How Do They Work?” What Are Keyloggers and How Do They Work?, Avast, 21 Feb. 2023, www.avast.com/c-keylogger. [22] Brousseau , Micheal. “The Evolution of Keyloggers.” Red Sky Alliance, 26 Jan. 2022, redskyalliance.org/xindustry/the-evo- lution-of-keyloggers. [23] “Anti-Keyloggers: How They Protect against Keyloggers.” Logix Consulting Managed IT Support Services Seattle, 27 Jan. 2021, logixconsulting.com/2020/06/26/anti- keyloggers-how-they-protect-against- keyloggers/. [24] Kumar, Satish. “Anti-Keylogger.” Online Tu- torials, Courses, and eBooks Library, 30 Jan. 2023, www.tutorialspoint.com/anti- keylogger. [25] “What Is Keylogging?” Cyble, 8 Nov. 2023, cyble.com/knowledge-hub/what-is-keylog- ging/. [26] Saad, Sayb. “5 Best Antiviruses That Protect against Keyloggers in 2023.” WizCase, 28 Sept. 2023, www.wizcase.com/blog/best- antivirus-protects-against-keylogging/. [27] “Keylogger Malware: What It Is and How to Remove It.” Ping Identity, www.pingiden- tity.com/en/resources/cybersecurity-funda- mentals/threats/keylogger.html. [28] Sonar, Jayshree. “Keylogger: What They Are and How to Secure Your Data.” Bigscal, Jayshree Sonar https://bigscal.com/wp-con- tent/uploads/2018/03/bigscal-logo1.png , 17 Nov. 2023, www.bigscal.com/blogs/cyber- security/what-is-keylogger/. [29] Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. “Keyloggers and Spyware (ITSB-49).” Ca- nadian Centre for Cyber Security, Govern- ment of Canada / Gouvernement du Canada, 1 Mar. 2008, www.cyber.gc.ca/en/guid- ance/security-bulletin-keyloggers-and-spy- ware-itsb-49. [30] “Top 8 Keylogger Protection Programs to Safeguard Your PC: Spyrix.” Spyrix Secu- rity Monitoring, 30 Oct. 2015, www.spyrix.com/en/8-best-programs-for- protect-pc-from-keyloggers.php. [31] “The Evolution of Anti-Virus.” Infosecurity Magazine, 1 Jan. 2009, www.infosecurity- magazine.com/magazine-features/the-evo- lution-of-anti-virus/. [32] Gillis, Alexander S. “What Is a Keylogger? Definition from Searchsecurity.” Security, TechTarget, 5 Oct. 2021, www.tech- target.com/searchsecurity/defini- tion/keylogger. [33] BlogPoster. “5 Common Types of Keylog- gers You Need to Know.” Logix Consulting Managed IT Support Services Seattle, 10 Dec. 2021, logixconsult- ing.com/2021/10/28/5-common-types-of- keyloggers-you-need-to-know/. [34] Chacos, Brad. “Malicious Keylogger Mal- ware Found Lurking in Highly Publicized GTA V Mod.” PCWorld, 15 May 2015, www.pcworld.com/article/427489/mali- cious-keylogger-malware-found-lurking-in- highly-publicized-gta-v-mod.html. [35] Montalbano, Elizabeth. “Ai-Powered ‘Blackmamba’ Keylogging Attack Evades Modern EDR Security.” AI-Powered “BlackMamba” Keylogging Attack Evades Modern EDR Security, 8 Mar. 2023, www.darkreading.com/endpoint-secu- rity/ai-blackmamba-keylogging-edr-secu- rity. [36] “Anti-Keylogger - Javatpoint.” Www.Ja- vatpoint.Com, www.javatpoint.com/anti- keylogger. [37] “Large Language Model.” Wikipedia, Wiki- media Foundation, 6 Dec. 2023, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_lan- guage_model