Fortify Your Defenses: Strategic Budget Allocation to Enhance Power Grid Cybersecurity* Rounak Meyur, Sumit Purohit, Braden K. Webb Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland {rounak.meyur, sumit.purohit, braden.webb}@pnnl.gov Abstract The abundance of cyber-physical components in modern day power grid with their diverse hardware and software vulner- abilities has made it difficult to protect them from advanced persistent threats (APTs). An attack graph depicting the prop- agation of potential cyber-attack sequences from the initial access point to the end objective is vital to identify criti- cal weaknesses of any cyber-physical system. A cyber se- curity personnel can accordingly plan preventive mitigation measures for the identified weaknesses addressing the cyber- attack sequences. However, limitations on available cyberse- curity budget restrict the choice of mitigation measures. We address this aspect through our framework, which solves the following problem: given potential cyber-attack sequences for a cyber-physical component in the power grid, find the optimal manner to allocate an available budget to implement necessary preventive mitigation measures. We formulate the problem as a mixed integer linear program (MILP) to identify the optimal budget partition and set of mitigation measures which minimize the vulnerability of cyber-physical compo- nents to potential attack sequences. We assume that the allo- cation of budget affects the efficacy of the mitigation mea- sures. We show how altering the budget allocation for tasks such as asset management, cybersecurity infrastructure im- provement, incident response planning and employee training affects the choice of the optimal set of preventive mitigation measures and modifies the associated cybersecurity risk. The proposed framework can be used by cyber policymakers and system owners to allocate optimal budgets for various tasks required to improve the overall security of a cyber-physical system. Introduction An increased reliance on Information Technology (IT) in various aspects of modern life has created a vast ecosystem *The research described in this paper is part of the Resilience Through Data Driven, Intelligently Designed Control (RD2C) Ini- tiative at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). It was conducted under the Laboratory Directed Research and Develop- ment Program at PNNL, a multiprogram national laboratory oper- ated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy. Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. of interconnected systems, networks and devices (Bansal and Kumar 2020). This provides a large attack surface for cyber adversaries to target, allowing them to gain unautho- rized access, steal data, and disrupt operations. The avail- ability of off-the-shelf hacking tools and malware in the un- derground market makes their task even easier to an extent, which allows them to initiate complex attacks without the re- quirement of sophisticated programming expertise (Liggett et al. 2019). Sophisticated malware, APTs and multi-stage cyber attacks involving multiple attack vectors are principal factors, which increase the complexity of these attacks and make them harder to detect and mitigate (Li and Liu 2021). This requires system owners and cybersecurity personnel to be well aware about the latest vulnerabilities and plan to mit- igate them effectively. The modern day energy infrastructure is equipped with smart devices, which aid in its monitoring and control. These devices are an integral part of the cyber-physical energy sys- tem (CPES). They form the link between the physical power grid and the communication network, allowing system op- erators to take online decisions and alter system conditions remotely. However, this comes at a cost of increased vul- nerability to cyber attacks where adversaries can gain ac- cess to these devices and adversely impact the power grid infrastructure, leading to severe events such as widespread blackout. A typical CPES consists of multiple smart devices interlinked through a communication network. These smart devices (such as a smart inverter or a protective relay) can be accessed directly by a cyber adversary or via the commu- nication network after a successful intrusion into a centrally situated device (such as a substation automation controller). Therefore, the goal of cybersecurity personnel is to protect these smart devices (or components) from adversarial cyber intrusions. From hereon, we use the terms ‘component’ and ‘smart device’ interchangeably. In this work, we aim to iden- tify an optimal set of preventive cybersecurity measures for each component in the CPES in order to reduce the risk of adversarial cyber attacks. A bottom-up approach involves evaluating the risk asso- ciated with the failure of a component by assessing the loss of power grid resilience or stability, and thereafter, allocat- ing budget towards securing the ‘critical’ components (Zo- arXiv:2312.13476v1 [cs.CR] 20 Dec 2023 grafopoulos et al. 2021). On the contrary, a top-down ap- proach focuses on cyber vulnerabilities for a component, possible adversarial techniques used to exploit them, and preventive strategies to avoid them (Das et al. 2022; Dutta et al. 2022; Subasi et al. 2022). This involves developing and implementing patches for individual vulnerabilities in a timely manner, which has been reported to be almost impos- sible (Culafi 2021). One of the major roadblocks responsible for this is the lack of resources required to cover the sheer surface area of diverse hardware and software vulnerabili- ties. To this end, an organizational effort is required which addresses the prioritizing the vulnerabilities and allocating available budget based on their priorities. The MITRE Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Com- mon Knowledge (MITRE ATT&CK) framework, developed by the MITRE Corporation, serves as a comprehensive and structured database to understand and organize information about cyber threats (MITRE Corporation 2023). The frame- work consists of tactics, or high-level objectives of an adver- sary during an attack, and techniques, or specific methods and procedures to accomplish their objectives within each tactic. It also provides detailed information about associated mitigation measures, which refer to strategies that organi- zations can employ to defend against or reduce the impact of specific techniques. However, information regarding both the cost of implementing the preventive mitigation measures and their efficacy against adversarial techniques are not in- cluded in the framework. This makes the task of evaluating the investment required to implement a proposed mitigation plan difficult to compute. At the same time, it is difficult to quantify how the presence or absence of mitigation measures affects the success rate of an adversarial technique. In this paper, we approach the evaluation of optimal poli- cies to improve a component’s cybersecurity in the CPES with an aim to alleviate its risk to adversarial threats. An im- portant aspect of policy formulation is to prioritize the prob- lems to address and partitioning available budget to imple- ment appropriate solutions. We treat the cybersecurity bud- get to be representative of the labor/staff hours and associ- ated resources required to implement the different mitiga- tion measures. Hence, we identify multiple organizational sectors to segregate the mitigation measures based on the skill or number of staff hours required for implementa- tion (Georgiadou, Mouzakitis, and Askounis 2021). There- after, our proposed approach evaluates the high priority miti- gation measures required to be implemented and the optimal manner of partitioning the cybersecurity budget to achieve this task. The underlying assumption of our approach is that allocating budget in a particular sector implies prioritizing mitigation measures within that sector. This improves the overall efficacy of the mitigation against all adversarial tech- niques. The formal problem statement can be stated as fol- lows: Given potential cyber-attack sequences for a cyber- physical component in the power grid, find the optimal man- ner to allocate an available labor budget to implement nec- essary preventive mitigation measures, which reduces the risk to adversary threats. Contributions. The major contributions of this paper are listed below: (i) we use a top-down approach to define the vulnerability of a CPES component based on the adver- sarial threats and attack sequences to which it is suscepti- ble, (ii) we use the MITRE ATT&CK framework to define the efficacy of mitigation measures against adversarial tech- niques and thereby, propose analytic expressions to evaluate the success rate of both individual techniques and entire at- tack sequences, (iii) we formulate a MILP by using these analytic expressions to identify the optimal partitions of a given limited budget to improve mitigation measure efficacy and evaluate the optimal mitigation set required to minimize successful adversarial attack sequences on the cyber com- ponent. The proposed holistic framework can be general- ized for any cyber-physical system or any component/sys- tem with recorded cyber vulnerabilities. Related Works Risk assessment of CPES has been studied extensively using various methodologies, where the impact of cyber attacks on specific nodes in the power network is analyzed to iden- tify the resulting damage. This has been done either through low fidelity simulation frameworks (Keliris et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2014; Georg et al. 2013; Dorsch et al. 2014; Queiroz, Mahmood, and Tari 2011) or through high fidelity real time simulation test beds (Vasisht et al. 2022; Sridhar et al. 2017; Haack et al. 2013; Stanovich et al. 2013). These frameworks are useful, since they provide means to identify critical com- ponents in terms of their impact on the power grid and en- able system planners to focus their cybersecurity counter- measures. However, recent intrusion reports show complex cyber attack sequences, which utilize the interconnected na- ture of communication systems in order to gain system-wide access (MITRE Corporation 2023). This necessitates a top- down approach, which identifies possible cyber attack se- quences and recommend countermeasures to prevent them. Authors in (Nandi, Medal, and Vadlamani 2016) propose an interdiction plan by deploying countermeasures at opti- mal set of edges in an attack graph to minimize losses due to security breaches. However, this work assumes a determin- istic graph, with a 100% or 0% breach success rate along the edges and also considers fixed budget for countermeasures along each edge in the graph The MITRE ATT&CK frame- work has been used in (Das et al. 2022; Dutta et al. 2022) to identify vulnerabilities in several CPES components and generate attack sequences. It provides list of mitigation mea- sures to prevent adversarial techniques. However, a holistic framework to identify the optimal set of countermeasures to prevent a set of attack sequences is not available in the present literature. The authors in (Li et al. 2019) have performed extensive survey to show how investing in various organizational sec- tors has affected the overall improvement of cybersecurity awareness in several organizations. The association of vari- ous mitigation measures specified in the MITRE ATT&CK framework to the cybersecurity culture of various organiza- tions has been presented in (Georgiadou, Mouzakitis, and Askounis 2021). This allows a holistic approach to address cybersecurity gaps in infrastructure and policies for an orga- nization. The allocation of resources to improve cybersecu- rity in an organization is a pertinent problem due to contrast- ing interest of different individuals (Srinidhi, Yan, and Tayi 2015). In this regard, the present literature lacks a frame- work capable of addressing the aspect of allocating budget to different organizational sectors serving a common goal of reducing vulnerability of adversarial cyber attacks. This paper aims to address this particular research gap. Preliminaries MITRE ATT&CK framework. The MITRE ATT&CK framework (MITRE Corporation 2023) serves as a database of cyber attack scenarios and methods undertaken by ad- versaries for cyber intrusion. It contains an extensive list of tactics and techniques common to adversarial cyber attacks. The ‘tactics’ denote adversarial motivation and ‘techniques’ represent the instrumental means of achieving those tacti- cal objectives. Moreover, each technique is associated with a list of mitigation measures such that a particular cyber de- fense system with a given set of mitigation measures will be able to prevent only their corresponding techniques. We denote sets of NT techniques and NM mitigation measures by T and M respectively and define a mapping g : T →M to identify the set of mitigation measures g (t) ⊆M, which can prevent an adversary from performing technique t. The pre-image of a mitigation measure m under g provides the induced mapping g−1 : M →T as the set of techniques g−1 (m) which can be prevented when m is available in the cyber defense system. Hybrid Attack Graph (HAG). The cybersecurity risk as- sessment of a component in the CPES involves identifying possible adversarial techniques that can be performed on it. To this end, we use a mapping framework, which maps com- mon cyber vulnerabilities in the component to common at- tack patterns that can be executed on these vulnerabilities. The framework is depicted in Fig. 1, where we provide the name of a component as input and the framework evaluates the vulnerabilities from the Common Vulnerability Enumer- ation (CVE) database, identifies respective weaknesses from the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) database, gets attack patterns from the Common Attack Pattern Enumera- tion and Classification (CAPEC) database and finally maps to the MITRE ATT&CK framework to obtain the list of ad- versarial techniques. Refer (Dutta et al. 2022) for details about each of these database. However, cybersecurity risk assessment also requires us to identify the sequence of techniques which can be per- formed on the component. A HAG serves as an excel- lent tool for this purpose. These are synthetically generated graphs which are created based on past instances of cyber attacks reported in openly available cyber intrusion reports (Donald, Meyur, and Purohit 2023). An attack graph de- scribes attack sequences through a set of possible techniques from the MITRE ATT&CK framework. The nodes in the graph represent adversarial techniques and the edges depict consecutive techniques used in an attack sequence. A single attack sequence is represented as a path in the HAG, describing the progression of techniques. We denote an attack sequence of length n as A := {t1, t2, · · · , tn}. The adversarial techniques t1, t2, · · · , tn which comprise the se- quence are nodes in the HAG. It is important to mention that Figure 1: Framework to map between various vulnerability and attack pattern databases. The list of adversarial tech- niques that might be possible to be executed on a “smart inverter” are obtained in this mapping. we assume the following while creating a HAG: (i) the tran- sition of techniques follow a predefined order of the associ- ated tactics, and (ii) techniques are not repeated. An example HAG is shown in Fig. 2. Figure 2: A sample HAG describing the possible attack se- quences that can be performed on a “smart inverter”. Each node denotes an adversarial technique and nodes with same color denote techniques belonging to the same tactic. Vulnerability of a component. The goal of this work is to harness the MITRE ATT&CK framework to plan mit- igation measures for a component. To this end, we need to define a component’s vulnerability in the context of the MITRE ATT&CK framework and the HAG generated for the component. The generated HAG provides us with pos- sible sequences of techniques that adversaries could utilize to perform a successful cyber attack. A planner might seek to choose an optimal set of mitigation measures to minimize the probability of compromising the component through any of the attack sequences identified through the HAG. This goal objective requires us to minimize the success probabil- ity of each and every attack sequence in the HAG. However, for all practical purposes, reducing these success probabili- ties to a sufficiently small value is acceptable. We term this objective as minimizing the number of “highly likely” at- tack sequences. First, we define what we mean by a “highly likely” attack sequence. Here, we assume that the probabil- ity of successful execution of the techniques are indepen- dent. Definition 1. A sequence Al := {t1, t2, · · · , } is said to be “highly likely” if the probability of its successful execution (or success rate vl) exceeds a chosen threshold δ > 0, i.e., vl = Y t∈Al rt ≥δ ⇐⇒ X t∈Al log rt ≥log δ (1) where rt is the success rate of technique t ∈Al. Definition 2. The vulnerability of the component D with a set of mitigation measures MS ⊆M is given by the fraction of “highly likely” attack sequences Vul (D, MS, δ) = ND (MS, δ) ND (2) where δ denotes the threshold success rate for a technique to be “highly likely” and ND (MS, δ) denotes the number of “highly likely” attack sequences. Table 1: Sets and set elements used Symbol Description T Set of all cyber adversary techniques M Set of all mitigation measures C Set of cybersecurity budget sectors MS Set of selected mitigation measures SD Set of attack sequences for device D NT Number of adversary techniques NM Number of mitigation measures ND Number of attack sequences in SD NC Number of cybersecurity budget sectors t An adversarial technique in set T m An adversarial technique in set M A An attack sequence Proposed Approach The goal of cybersecurity planning is to identify which miti- gation measures to implement to reduce the vulnerability of the cyber-physical component under consideration. We de- fine the optimal defender problem as follows. Problem 1 (Optimal Defender Problem). Given limited budget to enhance cybersecurity of a component D, find the optimal set of mitigation measures MS to minimize its vul- nerability Vul (D, MS) for a given set of attack sequences SD. The main challenge arises when evaluating the cost of implementing each mitigation measure—either in terms of monetary investment or required time commitment. Further- more, the efficacy of each mitigation measure against the ad- versarial techniques is usually unknown. However, we note that allocating additional budget generally improves the ef- ficacy of mitigation measures. Therefore, we formulate the problem in a way to to address how to allocate a limited cybersecurity budget to reduce component vulnerability. We state the strategic cybersecurity budget allocation problem as follows: Problem 2 (Cybersecurity Budget Allocation Problem). Given a limited budget to enhance the cybersecurity of a component D, find the optimal way to partition the budget in order to improve efficacy of a set of mitigation measures MS and thereby minimize the vulnerability Vul (D, MS) of the component with a given set of attack sequences SD. Budget allocation. Following (Georgiadou, Mouzakitis, and Askounis 2021), we categorize the mitigation measures into the following overlapping sectors (or categories): as- set management, business continuity, access and trust, op- erations, defense, security governance and employee train- ing. We partition the entire available budget into the above NC sectors. Let bj denote the portion of budget assigned to the jth category and P j bj = 1. Further, we define matrix C ∈{0, 1}NM×NC such that Cij = 1 if the ith mitigation is included in the jth category, otherwise Cij = 0. The underlying assumption is that allocating budget im- proves mitigation measure efficacy, i.e., the probability that a mitigation measure successfully prevents a technique. In our case, we also assume that for a given mitigation, this probability is uniform for all associated techniques. A miti- gation measure mi ∈M belongs to one or more of the NC sectors. We assume that in order to improve the efficacy of a mitigation, the budget must be allocated to all of the as- sociated sectors to which it belongs. Therefore, we compute the fractional budget fi allocated for improving efficacy of mitigation measure mi as the weighted sum of the category budgets, fi = PNC j=1 Cijbj PNC j=1 Cij (3) Let f be the NM-length vector obtained by stacking the fi entries for all mitigation measures. The matrix version of (3) is written as f = diag (C1)−1 Cb, where 1 is a vector of 1s. Let ηi,0 ∈[0, 1) denote the initial efficacy of the ith mit- igation. This depends on the efficacy of the mitigation mea- sures already in place – for example, the strength of fire- wall. We define an exponential improvement in the efficacy with increase in the cybersecurity labor budget, such that it is asymptotic to value of 1.0 based on the following expres- sion: ηi = 1 −(1 −ηi,0) e−λfi (4) where ηi is the improved efficacy and λ is a suitable scaling factor to relate the improvement in efficacy to the overall budget allocation. Fig. 3 shows the exponential improve- ment in mitigation efficacy for λ = 0.1. An exponential relation mimics the most natural behavior of diminishing returns on investments and has been used in similar mod- els (Kubanek 2017). In practice, the parameter λ denotes the organization’s ef- ficiency in utilizing the allocated budget to improve the over- all cybersecurity. A high λ means a higher rate of improve- ment in efficacy for a given increase in budget allocation factor. Further, note that for a given λ, the maximum im- provement in efficacy of mitigation i occurs when budget is allocated to all the associated sectors. Figure 3: Improvement in mitigation efficacy with increase in allocated budget. Success rate of techniques. Let pi,k be the probability that technique tk ∈T is avoided by a mitigation measure mi ∈M. Note that pik = 0 for all techniques tk ∈T which cannot be mitigated by mi, i.e., tk /∈g−1 (mi). Based on the assumption mentioned in the previous section, we have pi,k = ηi, if tk ∈g−1 (mi) 0, otherwise (5) Let M ∈{0, 1}NM×NT denote the mitigation-technique relation matrix. The entry Mik along the ith row and kth column of M is 1 if the technique tk ∈T is mitigated by mitigation measure mi ∈M; otherwise the entry is 0. This is constructed from the MITRE ATT&CK framework. Fig. 4 shows the matrix through a heat-map where the rows denote the mitigation measures and columns represent techniques. The techniques for each tactic are grouped together. The opacity of every element in the matrix shows the efficacy of the mitigation measure against the adversarial technique. We call this matrix as the mitigation profile. Figure 4: Mitigation-technique relation matrix with efficacy values for each mitigation measure against adversarial tech- niques. We want to identify the set of mitigation measures MS ⊆ M which would reduce the vulnerability of the component D with possible attack sequences listed in SD. Let xi ∈{0, 1} denote the absence/presence of mitigation measure mi in the set MS. Note that the mitigation measures which are not present in the cyber system cannot affect the success rate of an adversarial technique. Using (5) we can write pik = ηixiMik (6) Observe that 1 −pik indicates the probability that tech- nique tk is not avoided by mitigation measure mi. We con- sider each event of technique tk being avoided by mitigation mi, ∀mi ∈M to be independent. Therefore, the success rate of a technique tk in the cyber system with a set of mitigation measures MS is computed as rk = Y i,mi∈MS (1 −pik) = NM Y i=1 (1 −xiMikηi) (7) The logarithm of (7) is computed as Lk = log (rk) = NM X i=1 log (1 −xiMikηi) (8) It is interesting to note that log (1 −xiMikηi) = log (1 −ηi) if xi = 1, Mik = 1 0 otherwise (9) which helps us simplify the log success rate of a technique tk as Lk = log (rk) = NM X i=1 xiMik log (1 −ηi) (10) Using (4) and (10) we have log (rk) = NM X i=1 xiMik [log (1 −ηi,0) −λfi] (11) Let x be the NM-length vector constructed by stacking the xi for all mitigation measures. We define matrix P ∈ RNM×NT with element Pik = Mik log (1 −ηi,0) along the ith row and kth column. Note that Pik ≤0 for all i, k since it is the logarithm of fractional values. The logarithm of the success rate of technique tk can therefore be computed as log (rk) = h P T x i k −λ h M T diag(f)x i k (12) where [z]k denotes the kth element of vector z. Next, we evaluate the success rate of an attack sequence. Recall that an attack sequence is a list of techniques. We define the attack sequence and technique relation matrix S ∈{0, 1}ND×NT where the entry Slk along the lth row and kth column is 1 if the technique tk is present in the at- tack sequence Al ∈SD and 0 otherwise. The logarithm of success rate of an attack sequence can be computed as log (vl) = X tk∈Al log rk = NT X k=1 Slk log rk (13) We can stack log (vl) for all the attack sequences to an ND- length vector l, which can be expressed as l = SP T x −λSM T diag(f)x (14) We can formulate Problem 2 as follows min b,x Vul (D, MS) (15a) s.to l = SP T x −λSM T diag(f)x (15b) f = diag (C1)−1 Cb (15c) 1T b = 1, b ≥0 (15d) Table 2: Matrices, vectors and variables used Symbol Description C Mitigation & budget category relation matrix M Mitigation & technique relation matrix S Attack sequence & technique relation matrix x Vector of mitigation measure indicator y Vector of attack sequence indicator f Vector of mitigation specific budget partitions b Vector of cybersecurity budget partitions l Vector of log of attack sequence success rate ηi Efficacy of mitigation mi rk Success rate of technique tk vl Success rate of attack sequence Al λ Skill level of defender Proposed Optimization Framework First, we define variable hi = fixi to get rid of the bi-linear product term in the expression of (15b). The corresponding NM-length vector obtained by stacking them is denoted by h. Since xi ∈{0, 1} and 0 ≤fi ≤1, we can write the following inequalities h ≤x (16a) h ≥0 (16b) h ≤f (16c) h ≥x −(1 −f) (16d) Note that when xi = 0, we obtain the equality hi = 0 from the first two inequalities, and when xi = 1, we obtain hi = fi from the last two inequalities. We use the definition of vulnerability described through (2), which leads us to a MILP as discussed below. We define the binary variable yl ∈{0, 1} to denote whether sequence Al ∈SD is “highly likely” or not. Mathematically, yl = ( 1, if h S  P T x −λM T h i l ≥log δ 0, otherwise (17) Define δ′ = log δ. We can rewrite (17) for all sequences Al ∈SD with a large positive constant K using the follow- ing inequalities Ky ≥SP T x −λSM T h −δ′1 (18a) K (1 −y) ≥δ′1 −SP T x + λSM T h (18b) Our aim is to minimize the number of “highly likely” attack sequences. We can therefore write the optimization problem as x⋆= arg min b∈RNC,x∈{0,1}NM 1T y (19a) s.to f = diag (C1)−1 Cb (19b) 1T b = 1, b ≥0 (19c) (16), (18) (19d) Results and Discussion We use the database mapping and the HAG generation frameworks (discussed in Section ) to obtain the attack se- quences for a component used in the CPES. In this sec- tion, we discuss the results obtained for the components - (i) substation automation controller, and (ii) smart inverter. For each component, we identify the set of MITRE ATT&CK adversary techniques which can be executed on it. There- after, we use the HAG generation framework to generate 100 sample HAGs. These steps are accomplished using the frameworks described in Section . From these HAGs, we identify possible attack sequences which can be executed on the components. In our case, we identify 397 sequences for substation automation controller and 364 sequences for smart inverter. We select only those attack sequences which contains adversarial techniques included under the “Impact” tactic of the MITRE ATT&CK framework. Therefore, we shortlist the attack sequences which are meaningful in the context of creating an impact in the CPES. Figure 5: Matrix showing the optimal mitigation strategy for the HAG for ‘smart inverter’ (top) and heat map of technique success rates (bottom) after implementation of the strategy. We assume a base case with the HAG presented in Fig. 2, where no mitigation measures are implemented. Therefore, all adversary techniques in the HAG have a success rate of 100%. Fig. 5 shows the optimal mitigation profile (top plot) and success rates of the techniques after implementing the optimal mitigation measures through a heat map on the HAG (bottom plot). It is evident from the mitigation profile that only particular set of mitigation measures are selected. The heat map shows impact of implementing the optimal mit- igation strategy in reducing the success rate of adversary techniques in the HAG. We note that the optimal strategy Figure 6: Optimal budget allocation in different sectors for improving cybersecurity of “substation automation controller” (left) and “smart inverter” (right). The stacked bar plots denote the percentage budget allocated to each sector and the red line plot denotes the vulnerability of the component with the prescribed budget allocation. Increased skill level of defender allows allocated budget to be efficiently used in improving the efficacy of mitigation and hence we observe reduction in vulnerability. identifies the mitigation measures which reduces the suc- cess rate of techniques such that maximum number of at- tack sequences are affected. This observation can be vali- dated from the fact that the techniques with the highest out- degree are the most influential nodes in the HAG. These are the techniques with the lowest success rates after the mitiga- tion measures are implemented. Next, we use the proposed optimization framework to par- tition allocated budget into various organizational sectors. We choose 7 sectors and identify set of mitigation mea- sures in each of the sectors as described in (Georgiadou, Mouzakitis, and Askounis 2021) – (i) assets includes hard- ware and software asset management, network infrastruc- ture management, improving data security and privacy, (ii) continuity sector consists of preventive strategies to continue business operations in the event of a data breach, (iii) access & trust deals with policies and practices for account and ac- cess management, (iv) operations sector involves perform- ing system risk assessment through Threat Intelligence pro- grams, (v) defense sector includes mitigation measures asso- ciated with firewall implementation, (vi) governance sector covers tasks related to audit log management and (vii) indi- vidual category involves practices making employees aware about cybersecurity risks through training programs and per- forming frequent security skill evaluation. Fig. 6 shows the results of optimal budget allocation for two components - (i) substation automation controller and (ii) smart inverter. We perform multiple experiments for dif- ferent skill level of the defender - thereby solving an opti- mization problem for each skill level. Recall that parameter λ denotes the skill level. Each bar shows the partitions of the budget for a particular defender skill level. Note that the partitions sum up to 100%. Further, we denote the vulner- ability of the component to the HAG sequences under the optimal mitigation policy with the red dot on each bar. This is computed using (2) after computing the optimal value of the objective function as follows. Vul (D, MS, δ) = ND (MS, δ) ND = 1T y⋆ ND (20) where y⋆denotes the optimal value of y in (19). We note that with increases in defender skill level, the vulnerability of the component to HAG sequences reduces. However, we notice that the budget allocation for each sec- tor do not follow any particular trend. This is because sectors overlap in their coverage of mitigation measures. In the case of “substation automation controller”, we observe that for an unskilled defender, the proposed optimization framework recommends the budget be allocated mostly towards the “ac- cess” sector which comprises of mitigation measures re- lated to access management, account management and pass- word robustness. With a skilled defender, we observe that budget allocation gets divided to other sectors such as “as- sets” and “defense”. We note similar observation for “smart inverter”—however, the budget gets divided to the “assets” and “access” sectors for more skilled defenders. Conclusion We propose a generalized framework which performs an op- timal partitioning of a limited cybersecurity budget into var- ious organizational sectors in order to improve the cyber- security of a smart device or component in the CPES. The framework identifies the adversarial threats and possible at- tack sequences which can be performed to exploit cyber vul- nerabilities of the component. Thereafter, we formulate an MILP optimization problem which aims to evaluate the op- timal budget partitions in order to minimize the number of highly likely attack sequences. Though we provide results for using the framework in CPES, the proposed methodol- ogy can be extended for any cyber-physical system. Such a framework equips managers in an organization to formulate cybersecurity policies, allocate staff budgets in order to im- prove the overall security and reduce risk of APTs. In practice, a significant portion of cybersecurity bud- get allocation is aimed at improving software and hardware tools to prevent APTs along with hiring skilled cybersecu- rity personnel. In our paper, we combine aspects of cyber- security tools and personnel skill through the parameters of efficacy and defender skill in our simplified analytic expres- sions. We plan to identify dedicated parameters which quan- tify these aspects in order to infuse realism in our model as part of our future work. References Bansal, S.; and Kumar, D. 2020. IoT Ecosystem: A Survey on Devices, Gateways, Operating Systems, Middleware and Communication. International Journal of Wireless Informa- tion Networks, 27(3): 340–364. Chen, B.; Butler-Purry, K. L.; Goulart, A.; and Kundur, D. 2014. Implementing a real-time cyber-physical system test bed in RTDS and OPNET. In 2014 North American Power Symposium (NAPS), 1–6. Culafi, A. 2021. Why patching vulnerabilities is still a problem, and how to fix it. https://www.techtarget. com/searchsecurity/news/252503950/Why-patching- vulnerabilities-is-still-a-problem-and-how-to-fix-it. Das, S. S.; Dutta, A.; Purohit, S.; Serra, E.; Halappanavar, M.; and Pothen, A. 2022. Towards Automatic Mapping of Vulnerabilities to Attack Patterns using Large Language Models. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Tech- nologies for Homeland Security (HST), 1–7. Donald, S.; Meyur, R.; and Purohit, S. 2023. Hybrid At- tack Graph Generation with Graph Convolutional Deep-Q Learning. In The 3rd Workshop on Artificial Intelligence- Enabled Cybersecurity Analytics, KDD 2023. Long Beach, CA, USA. Dorsch, N.; Kurtz, F.; Georg, H.; H¨agerling, C.; and Wiet- feld, C. 2014. Software-defined networking for Smart Grid communications: Applications, challenges and advantages. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Com- munications (SmartGridComm), 422–427. Dutta, A.; Purohit, S.; Bhattacharya, A.; and Bel, O. 2022. Cyber Attack Sequences Generation for Electric Power Grid. In The 10th Workshop on Modelling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems (MSCPES), 1–6. IEEE. Georg, H.; M¨uller, S. C.; Dorsch, N.; Rehtanz, C.; and Wiet- feld, C. 2013. INSPIRE: Integrated co-simulation of power and ICT systems for real-time evaluation. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 576–581. Georgiadou, A.; Mouzakitis, S.; and Askounis, D. 2021. As- sessing MITRE ATT&CK Risk Using a Cyber-Security Cul- ture Framework. Sensors, 21(9): 3267. Haack, J.; Akyol, B.; Tenney, N.; Carpenter, B.; Pratt, R.; and Carroll, T. 2013. VOLTTRON: An agent platform for integrating electric vehicles and Smart Grid. In 2013 Inter- national Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (IC- CVE), 81–86. Keliris, A.; Konstantinou, C.; Tsoutsos, N. G.; Baiad, R.; and Maniatakos, M. 2016. Enabling multi-layer cyber- security assessment of Industrial Control Systems through Hardware-In-The-Loop testbeds. In 2016 21st Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 511–518. Kubanek, J. 2017. Optimal decision making and matching are tied through diminishing returns. Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences, 114(32): 8499–8504. Li, L.; He, W.; Xu, L.; Ash, I.; Anwar, M.; and Yuan, X. 2019. Investigating the impact of cybersecurity policy awareness on employees’ cybersecurity behavior. Interna- tional Journal of Information Management, 45: 13–24. Li, Y.; and Liu, Q. 2021. A comprehensive review study of cyber-attacks and cyber security; Emerging trends and re- cent developments. Energy Reports, 7: 8176–8186. Liggett, R.; Lee, J. R.; Roddy, A. L.; and Wallin, M. A. 2019. The Dark Web as a Platform for Crime: An Exploration of Illicit Drug, Firearm, CSAM, and Cybercrime Markets, 1– 27. Cham: Springer International Publishing. MITRE Corporation. 2023. MITRE ATT&CK Framework. Last accessed February 2023. Nandi, A. K.; Medal, H. R.; and Vadlamani, S. 2016. In- terdicting attack graphs to protect organizations from cyber attacks: A bi-level defender–attacker model. Computers & Operations Research, 75: 118–131. Queiroz, C.; Mahmood, A.; and Tari, Z. 2011. SCADASim—A Framework for Building SCADA Simulations. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2(4): 589–597. Sridhar, S.; Ashok, A.; Mylrea, M.; Pal, S.; Rice, M.; and Gourisetti, S. N. G. 2017. A testbed environment for buildings-to-grid cyber resilience research and development. In 2017 Resilience Week (RWS), 12–17. Srinidhi, B.; Yan, J.; and Tayi, G. K. 2015. Allocation of resources to cyber-security: The effect of misalignment of interest between managers and investors. Decision Support Systems, 75: 49–62. Stanovich, M. J.; Leonard, I.; Sanjeev, K.; Steurer, M.; Roth, T. P.; Jackson, S.; and Bruce, M. 2013. Develop- ment of a smart-grid cyber-physical systems testbed. In 2013 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT), 1–6. Subasi, O.; Purohit, S.; Bhattacharya, A.; and Chatterjee, S. 2022. Impact-Driven Sampling Strategies for Hybrid Attack Graphs. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Tech- nologies for Homeland Security (HST), 1–7. Vasisht, S.; Rahman, A.; Ramachandran, T.; Bhattacharya, A.; and Adetola, V. 2022. Multi-fidelity Bayesian Optimiza- tion for Co-design of Resilient Cyber-Physical Systems. In 2022 ACM/IEEE 13th International Conference on Cyber- Physical Systems (ICCPS), 298–299. Zografopoulos, I.; Ospina, J.; Liu, X.; and Konstantinou, C. 2021. Cyber-Physical Energy Systems Security: Threat Modeling, Risk Assessment, Resources, Metrics, and Case Studies. IEEE Access, 9: 29775–29818.