The Incoherency Risk in the EU’s New Cyber Security Policies Jukka Ruohonen[0000−0001−5147−3084] juk@mmmi.sdu.dk University of Southern Denmark, Sønderborg, Denmark Abstract. The European Union (EU) has been pursuing new cyber se- curity policies in recent years. This paper presents a short reflection of four such policies. The focus is on potential incoherency, meaning a lack of integration, divergence between the member states, institutional dys- function, and other related problems that should be at least partially avoidable by sound policy-making. According to the results, the four policies have substantially increased the complexity of the EU’s cyber security framework. In addition, there are potential problems with trust, divergence between industry sectors and different technologies, bureau- cratic conflicts, and technical issues, among other things. With these insights, the paper not only contributes to the study of EU policies but also advances the understanding of cyber security policies in general. Keywords: cyber security, policy coherency, CER, NIS2, CSA, CRA, EU 1 Introduction The historical origins of the EU’s framework for cyber security trace to the late 1990s and early 2000s during which the first policies and institutional arrange- ments were established [20]. Since then, the framework has been continuously altered and updated as cyber security has gained prominence—and vicious cyber attacks have continued. Throughout the EU, these attacks, whether they mani- fest themselves as data breaches, ransomware operations, or industrial espionage, cause substantial financial losses, reputation damage, and even human misery. Geopolitical conflicts and tensions, disruptive new technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), risks related to critical infrastructure and even democracy, and related major factors have further increased the importance of cyber security. To this end, the European Commission published in 2020 a new strategy for cyber security in the EU. According to this strategy, improving cyber security is nec- essary for enjoying the benefits from innovation, connectivity, and automation, while still maintaining fundamental rights and freedoms [9]. Cyber security is thus an enabler on one hand. On the other, it is also a source for innovations in itself. While regulations are often seen as a hindrance to industry and its com- petitiveness, it is therefore important to consider also policy innovations that may improve not only cyber security but also industry competitiveness. Proceedings of the 23rd IFIP Conference on e-Business, e-Services, and e-Society (I3E 2024), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (vol. 14907), Heerlen, Springer, pp. 284–295. This version is the author’s copy. The publisher’s definite version is available at Springer via https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72234-9_24 arXiv:2405.12043v2 [cs.CR] 27 Sep 2024 For a long time, there was a lack of evaluation studies on the various digital policies enacted throughout the world [11]. While the situation has improved over time, critical evaluations and reflections are always needed as these allow to also understand the potential challenges ahead. With this point in mind, the paper at hand presents a brief critical reflection on four recent cyber security policies, some of which are already enacted EU laws. All belong to the noted cyber security strategy pursued by the von der Leyen’s first Commission. Fur- thermore, the other traditional pillars of the EU’s cyber security framework are mostly omitted; these pillars are cyber crime, cyber defense, and, to a lesser extent, data protection [4]. The critical reflection pursued is motivated by po- tential policy incoherency. This concept is elaborated in the opening Section 2. After this elaboration, the four policies are briefly discussed in the subsequent Section 3. Then, the potential incoherencies arising from the four new cyber security policies are elaborated and speculated in Section 4. The last Section 5 concludes. Finally, it should be emphasized that the paper is a reflection on a complex policy constellation. Actual evaluation can only be done in a distant fu- ture once the policies have been adopted by the member states and the practical operation and administration of these have continued for a sufficient time. This point justifies the term risk in the paper’s title; the focus is on potential and not (yet) actual problems under uncertainty about the future. Methodologically the critical reflection falls to the domain of interpretive policy analysis [14, 21]. That is, the methodological approach is not an “objective” cost-benefit analysis or other related mechanical evaluation, but rather a short critical interpretation of the policies and their impact under the objective to improve cyber security. 2 Policy Coherency and Incoherency The EU has increased the interdependence of its member states and thus policy convergence has been an important goal particularly with respect to the internal market. In short: the rules should be the same across all member states. To achieve convergence, a policy needs to be coherent. A coherent policy is well- integrated, meaning that its diverse components work well together [2]. Lack of integration has been a typical problem in the cyber security domain. In many countries different cyber security agencies and actors have formed their own silos beyond which cooperation may not work and critical information does not necessarily traverse [10]. The EU is not an exception; different EU agencies and also the member states themselves have often formed their own silos [3, 4]. While a EU policy typically contains many internal components, integration should thus apply also across the member states and through EU-level administration. It is useful to distinguish different forms of policy coherency. Thus, inter- nal coherency can be understood to refer to the consistency between the goals, objectives, modalities, and protocols of a particular EU policy; intra-country coherency can be seen to involve the consistency of a member state’s poli- cies in terms of their combined contribution to the EU; and, finally, inter- country coherency can be interpreted as the consistency and uniformity of poli- cies across several member states with respect to their aggregated impact at the EU-level [16]. Extensive transaction costs are a typical sign of problems in inter- nal coherency; these costs are due to a lack of information, a need for monitoring and control, and enforcement measures and administrative support [2]. Ideally, such costs can be decreased by good planning. The actors involved also learn over time, which should also eventually reduce the transaction costs. Analytically, in the EU context, it is useful to further think in terms of vertical and horizontal policy coherency [17, 19]. Vertical coherency refers to the alignment between the EU and the member states; the aggregated impact to the EU in intra-country and inter-country coherency is thus vertical. In contrast, horizontal policy co- herency refers to the uniformity of either EU-level arrangements or the member states’ policies and the convergence between them. These policies can be purely national laws or transposed EU laws. This simple analytical machinery for policy coherency allows to also approach the antonym, policy incoherency. A traditional form of policy incoherency in the EU context is vertical; a mis- match between EU laws and their national adaptations. In purely judicial cases, there are well-established mechanisms for dealing with this kind of incoherency; the European Commission may even start an infringement proceedings against a member state for incorrect national transposition of a given EU law. Another form of vertical policy incoherency may arise when the roles and responsibilities are not defined clearly enough between EU-level and national institutions and institutional practices. A coherent policy solution requires also sound alignment between institutions and technologies [15]. For instance, national information exchanges toward EU-level institutions may work poorly due to ambiguous legal guidelines or poor technical specifications, both of which are likely to increase transaction costs. A potential dysfunction may further affect coordination more generally. With respect to coordination, particularly important at the EU-level is the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), although there are many other relevant actors as well. A risk of either vertical or horizontal inco- herency is further solidified by the recent policies that have further increased the number of cyber security actors both nationally and at the EU-level. Also horizontal policy incoherencies have been common in the EU. A typical form of horizontal (inter-country) incoherency is a mismatch between national adaptations of a EU law. In other words, a particular EU law may differ from a member state to another due to different national interpretations and adap- tations. Countering this type of horizontal incoherency with harmonization has been a long-standing goal in the EU. Further institutional horizontal incoheren- cies may arise both within national public administrations and EU-level admin- istration. In terms of the former, ambiguities may cause bureaucratic conflicts between different national public administration units. Data protection would be a good example because national data protection authorities are typically distinct from cyber security authorities, which are distinct from law enforce- ment authorities, although all may be required to address some cyber security incidents such as data breaches. Analogous conflicts may emerge between differ- ent industry sectors. Such conflicts are non-optimal because a coherent policy should be consistent, comprehensive, and harmonious across domains and sec- tors in a manner that does not compromise its goals [6]. Even though operational cyber security has thus far been limited at the EU-level, somewhat analogous institutional conflicts may still emerge also at the EU-level administration. Finally, a policy incoherency may become more serious if the misguided pol- icy outcomes become permanent. In the present context, a particular concern is whether a policy incoherency may turn into a permanent institutional inco- herency. Unlike policies, which, at least in theory, may be altered and updated relatively easily, institutions are much more salient and permanent. In fact, this institutional stickiness is one of the primary takeaways from the extensive path- dependency literature [12, 20]. In the EU context these institutions can be un- derstood to refer to permanent arrangements or agencies with recruited staff who typically work in fixed physical locations. While there is room for insti- tutional innovation when designing new EU policies, also the incoherency risks from poor institutional planning are thus clear. It is not easy to backpedal once a specific agency or a permanent bureaucratic arrangement has been established. The same point applies to technologies and technical solutions, especially since some of the new policies envision large pan-European cyber security solutions. 3 The Policies in Brief There are four cyber security policies that are important for approaching poten- tial policy incoherencies in the EU. These are illustrated in Fig. 1. Two of these are already enacted laws, while two are still under political decision-making. Directive (EU) 2022/2557 CER Critical infrastructure entities Risk analysis Incident notifications Background checks Directive (EU) 2022/2555 NIS2 Risk analysis Incident notifications (CSIRTs) Registries for critical entities European vulnerability database NIS cooperation group EU-CyCLONe Cyber security strategies COM(2023) 209 final CSA European cyber shield Cyber emergency mechanism Cyber reserve Cyber incident review mechanism COM/2022/454 final CRA Essential security requirements for products Security patches Market surveillance Risk levels for products Self- assessment or third-party audits Actively exploited vulnerabilities Fig. 1. The Four Cyber Security Policies The first law is the Critical Entities Resilience (CER) directive. This direc- tive substantially increases the amount of critical infrastructure entities from an older directive that only considered the energy and transportation sectors. Now, also the banking, financial market, healthcare, water, and food sectors together with core elements of the Internet’s infrastructure, public administration, and space technologies are defined as critical. Regarding the Internet’s infrastructure, domain name system services, top-level domain name registries, data centers, content delivery networks, and cloud computing services are covered, among a few other technologies. While leeway is left for the member states regarding the details on how the critical entities are identified, the CER directive imposes also many requirements for the identified critical entities. Among these are risk as- sessments for natural and man-made risks, incident notifications for significant disruptions, and background checks for employees operating the critical entities. The second law is the so-called NIS2 directive. Based on a significant update of the older NIS directive, it essentially augments the requirements from the CER directive for the critical entities. Particularly risk assessments are specified in more detail; these should cover not only traditional information security and incident handling, but also business continuity, supply chain security, security of equipment acquisitions, employee training, use of cryptography, and organiza- tional security should be assessed. On the public sector side, the member states are obliged to designate one or more competent authorities with a single point of contact for incident reporting. Substantial enforcement powers are also granted for the competent authorities; administrative fines are part of the enforcement toolbox. At the EU-level, ENISA is tasked to administer the registries for the critical Internet technologies and to build a European vulnerability database. As for incidents, as before, these are reported to national computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) whose obligations are also extended, including with re- spect to coordinated vulnerability disclosure and cooperation at the EU-level. In addition to the management of large-scale cyber security incidents and the national enforcement of the directive, the competent authorities have a liaison function for cross-border investigations conducted together with the Commission and ENISA. Furthermore, the NIS2 directive specifies a NIS cooperation group and European cyber crisis liaison organisation network (EU-CyCLONe) for im- proved EU-level coordination, including with respect to information exchanges and situational awareness. Finally, the NIS2 directive obliges each member state to publish a national cyber security strategy. The Cyber Solidarity Act (CSA) law proposal is the third relevant cyber security policy to consider. The proposal’s motivation originates from serious cross-border cyber crises in the face of the war in Ukraine. The objectives of the proposal are to be implemented with pan-European security operations centers (SOCs) together with a cyber emergency mechanism and a review mechanism for large cyber security incidents. In practice, the SOCs discussed amount to large, either national or cross-border, threat intelligence platforms; the goal is to enhance attack detection, prevention, and response. Through EU-based funding available via the Digital Europe Programme (DEP), national SOCs are expected to enlarge into cross-border SOCs, eventually creating a unified “European cyber shield”. Information obtained through cross-border SOCs about large-scale cyber security incidents should be shared between the CSIRT network, EU-CyCLONe, and the Commission. The cyber emergency mechanism, in turn, is tailored for preparedness actions, recovery actions from large-scale incidents, and mutual as- sistance between the member states. Of these, the mutual assistance provision is accompanied with a specific cyber security reserve that can be deployed to any given member state upon a request to the Commission and ENISA, and informing of the CSIRT network and where appropriate the EU-CyCLONe net- work. In practice, the reserve is composed of members from the CSIRT network together with personnel from EU agencies, although support from like-minded third countries is also allowed. Finally, the incident review mechanism is planned for post hoc analysis and review of a large-scale cyber security incident. Most of the work involved is delegated to ENISA. The fourth and final law proposal is the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA). It is based on a different rationale than the three other policies. The proposal is mo- tivated by consumer protection jurisprudence, the low level of cyber security in many information technology products, as reflected by widespread vulnerabili- ties in them and inconsistent provision of security patches to counter the vul- nerabilities, and insufficient information for consumers to make informed choices regarding cyber security. To this end, the proposal obliges manufacturers to take security into account by specifying essential security requirements, including for coordinated vulnerability disclosure. In addition, manufacturers are mandated to provide security patches for the whole life cycle of their products. On the public sector side, the proposal lays down rules on market surveillance and enforcement. Administrative fines are again part of the enforcement arsenal. Although a few specialized products are excluded, the proposal in practice covers the whole infor- mation technology sector. Also software products are in the scope. Furthermore, the proposal categorizes products according to their cyber security risk level. While the manufacturing of most products is possible under self-assessment of conformity, products categorized as critical require third-party audits. Regarding coordinated vulnerability disclosure, manufacturers are further obliged to inform ENISA about any actively exploited vulnerabilities in their products. According to the proposal, ENISA will then inform the national CSIRTs. Finally, it should be emphasized that the CSA and CRA proposals are still being negotiated. Therefore, the final laws may differ from the original law pro- posals considered. All policies except the CSA proposal also grant the Commis- sion a power to adopt delegated acts to supplement the policies in different ways. In general, these acts increase the Commission’s power to further shape the EU’s new cyber security policy framework. 4 Potential Incoherencies The first potential horizontal policy incoherency is the traditional one, the di- vergence between national transpositions of the EU laws in the member states. In particular, CER and NIS2 are directives, which give more room for national transpositions than regulations, including the CSA and CRA law proposals, which are directly applicable EU law. The second potential incoherency originates from the background checks specified in the CER directive. The type of potential incoherency is horizon- tal. Namely, there may be some conflicts in national adaptations of the directive because background checks are typically done by law enforcement or intelligence agencies, whereas, as per the NIS2 directive, incident notifications are typically delivered to different organizations in most member states. Furthermore, a tradi- tional horizontal incoherency between the member states is likely because there is no harmonization in the EU for background checks or security clearances [18]. Because some of the critical entities are operated by multinational companies, it may also be difficult to carry out background checks in practice as there are no extraterritorial powers for such checks. The third potential horizontal incoherency is also related to the CER and NIS2 directives. Namely, the critical entities specified in the directives should be synchronized for sound administration and enforcement. Due to the previous point, some incoherency may still appear. For instance, it may be that back- ground checks are not done uniformly across all critical entities in some member states. If synchronization is lacking, duplication of work may also occur with the risk assessments specified in both directives. The fourth potential incoherency continues the same horizontal theme; the policies put different industry sectors and technologies into a uneven position. This potential incoherency is present with respect to the critical entities specified in the CER and NIS2 directives; the non-critical sectors left behind may receive less attention and resources for cyber security. Alternatively, it can be argued that the directives specify too many sectors as critical, which may cause different interpretation problems and lead to incoherent implementation and inconsistent enforcement across the member states [13]. Analogous consequences are present with respect to the CRA proposal; the products defined as non-critical presum- ably receive much less scrutiny than the critical products. This uneven treatment of sectors and technologies carries also economic consequences. Given the diver- gence of the information technology sectors in the member states, the uneven treatment may even lead to a larger horizontal incoherency across the union. The fifth potential policy incoherency is related to the additional administra- tive bodies specified in the NIS2 directive and the CSA proposal. In particular, the new EU-CyCLONe network may cause redundancy because the CSIRT net- work is already well-established in Europe. In fact, the EU’s cyber security policy framework was from the beginning built upon the CSIRT network with ENISA acting in a coordination role at the EU-level [20]. Analogous redundancy issues may arise with respect to the cyber reserve specified in the CSA proposal. Many problematic scenarios are possible due to the redundancy and related duplica- tion. For instance, horizontal incoherency may again manifest itself through bu- reaucratic conflicts, starting from the recruitment of staff to the EU-CyCLONe network, the CSIRT network, the NIS cooperation group, and the cyber reserve. Trust is behind the sixth potential policy incoherency, which may be both horizontal and vertical. Because decision-making is centralized to the EU-level, there may be potential issues in the deployment of the cyber reserve envisioned in the CSA proposal in case a member state in need lacks trust toward ENISA or the Commission. Alternatively, there is no strict deadlines for the deployment decision-making; therefore, as many cyber security issues require urgent atten- tion, the deployment may become moot especially under multiple and concurrent requests [8]. Furthermore, the allowance of third countries in the reserve may prevent a member state from requesting help in case it lacks trust toward a given third country. While it is difficult to evaluate how realistic these scenarios are, a bigger potential incoherency is also present; it remains unclear how the cyber reserve will align with similar initiatives taken under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Duplication of effort and resources is a real possibility. There is also a more deep-rooted question about civilian and military approaches to cyber security [18]. Particularly the cyber reserve may blur the boundary be- tween the two. Such blurring of fundamental boundaries might perhaps even lead to a philosophical incoherency in the EU’s cyber security framework. The seventh set of potential incoherencies is related to the SOCs specified in the CSA proposal. A potential vertical incoherency may be present because the proposal does not say much about how EU-level agencies should share data with national SOCs [8]. Furthermore, as cross-border SOCs are expected to share information about large-scale incidents rather widely across different actors, hy- pothetical conflicts and trust issues may potentially spill also to the domain of operational security. Because SOCs are about operational security, these pre- sumably process and transmit sensitive data, which may have even national security consequences. Therefore, lack of trust between the member states may cause difficulties for the establishment of cross-border SOCs to begin with. It is difficult to say whether the financial carrots from the DEP can fully resolve this trust conundrum. Finally, there are significant technical interoperability challenges in building large cross-border SOCs and integrating these to already existing national SOCs. The CSA proposal also eagerly speaks about using AI for the threat intelligence available through SOCs. However, during the negotia- tions, some skepticism was expressed about whether AI technologies are mature enough to be used in the envisioned European cyber shield. While it is too early to say anything about actual implementations and their funding through the DEP or other instruments, it can be still concluded that also technologies and technical issues may contribute to the potential incoherency. Similar points apply with respect to SOCs already established in the private sector. While these were to some extent addressed during the negotiations [5], the original proposal did not consider cooperation and information exchanges with private sector actors. The eight potential policy incoherency is also related to trust. The type of the incoherency is vertical. During the still ongoing negotiations of the CRA proposal, considerable criticism was expressed by some member states and stake- holders about the delivery of information on actively exploited vulnerabilities to ENISA. The fear was that such a delivery would then spill the sensitive informa- European Commission MOVE, ENER, NEAR, INTPA, GROW, ECFIN, SANTE, JRC, RTD, REGION JUST ECHO HOME CONNECT ERCC ISF Horizon DEP DIGIT CSIRT network CERT-EU ENISA NIS2 cooperation group National CSIRTs National participants EUROJUST EUROPOL CEPOL AMLA Joint cybercrime action task- force (J-CAT) EC3 National and regional law enforcement authorities Financial intelligence units Competency, development ECCC National cybersecurity centers European cyber shield Cyber emergency mechanism Cyber incident review mechanism Cyber reserve European Defence Agency PESCO EEAS SIAC INTCEN SITROOM Hybrid fusion cell CMPD SECPOL PPPs ISACs REA KDT Sectoral agencies (e.g., EASA, eu-LISA) Critical infrastructure entities (NIS2) AMLA: Anti-money-laundering authority CEPOL: European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training CERT-EU: Computer Emergency Response Team for EU CMPD: Crisis Management and Planning Directorate CONNECT: Communications Networks, Content and Technology DG DEP: Digital Europe Programme DIGIT: Informatics DG EASA: European Union Aviation Safety Agency EC3: Europol's Cybercrime Centre ECCC: European Cybersecurity Competence Centre ECFIN: Economic and Financial Affairs DG ECHO: European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations DG EEAS: European External Action Service ENER: Energy DG ENISA: European Union Agency for Cybersecurity ERCC: Emergency Response Coordination Centre EU-CyCLONe: European Cyber Crisis Liaison Organisation Network eu-LISA: European Union Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems UROJUST: European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation EUROPOL: European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation GROW: Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs DG EU-CyCLONe HOME: Migration and Home Affairs DG Horizon: Horizon Europe INTCEN: European Union Intelligence and Situation Centre ISAC: Information Sharing and Analysis Centre ISF: Internal Security Fund INTPA: International Partnerships DG JRC: Joint Research Centre JUST: Justice and Consumers DG KDT: Key Digital Technologies MOVE: Mobility and Transport DG NEAR: Neighborhood and Enlargement Negotiations DG NIS2: Network and Information Security Directive PESCO: Permanent Structured Cooperation Framework PPP: Public-Private Partnership REA: Research Executive Agency REGION: Regional and Urban Policy DG RTD: Research and Innovation DG SANTE: Health and Food Safety DG SECPOL: Security Policy and Conflict Prevention SITROOM: Situation Room Fig. 2. Coordination at the EU-level (modified after [8, p. 14]) tion to the whole EU and the various actors involved. As with the cross-border SOCs, national security was part of the fear. The apparent lack of trust may not be toward ENISA, however, but rather toward the EU-wide CSIRT network and the other actors involved. While a compromise was found during the negoti- ations, information about actively exploited vulnerabilities is still delivered also to ENISA under most conditions [1]. Analogously, it was also feared that manu- facturers would be hesitant to participate because national CSIRTs are trusted among manufacturers in some member states but not necessarily in others. Last but not least, a further potential incoherency is present at the EU-level. As can be concluded from Fig. 2, the EU-level cyber security administration is highly complex and the new policies have further increased the complexity. Bureaucratic inertia thus poses a real possibility of a permanent institutional in- coherency. The issue is also vertical because a member state may have difficulties at formulating a coherent stance at the EU-level institutions due to the apparent institutional fragmentation. Horizontally, it remains somewhat unclear how well the roles and responsibilities are defined with respect to the various EU-level agencies and arrangements. Indeed, on one hand, according to evaluations, EU agencies tend to share cyber security information poorly among themselves [7]. On the other hand, trust is a potential issue also at the EU-level, and the actively exploited vulnerabilities in the CRA proposal again provide a good example. Be- cause information is delivered to ENISA, it may spill also to EU agencies who may have an incentive to develop exploits for the vulnerabilities. The examples include the Europol’s cyber crime centre (EC3) and the EU’s intelligence ap- paratus (INTCEN). Despite these potential trust and other related issues, none of the cyber security policies considered establish clear firewalls between differ- ent EU agencies and bureaucratic administrative units. While the free flow of information may improve cyber security, it may also cause cyber insecurities. Finally, a potential incoherency may be present with respect to the different funding instruments. The DEP instrument is mostly about straightforward im- plementation. Therefore, it remains unclear how well it aligns with the research and innovation goals pursued in the large-scale Horizon Europe programme. Fur- thermore, the civilian-military nexus is again present as rather similar goals are pursued on the military side through the PESCO financial instrument. 5 Conclusion This paper presented a critical reflection on the EU’s new cyber security poli- cies. Four policies were considered: the CER and NIS2 directives and the CSA and CRA proposals. The paper’s focus was on the potential policy incoheren- cies that may arise from the four policies. Several such potential incoherencies were identified. These include traditional problems, including potential diver- gence between the member states, industry sectors, and different technologies, administrative conflicts, and procedural issues. Trust (or lack thereof) is a newer potential source of problems. As the policies address pan-European transmission of sensitive security information, including about exploitable vulnerabilities, a lack of trust between the member states and EU-level agencies or between the member states themselves may cause problems in the future. This point ap- plies also to the threat intelligence information shared through the cross-border SOCs envisioned. These SOCs also demonstrate a potential problem in terms of integration, interoperability, and other potential technical obstacles. In addition, many other policy incoherency problems are present, including with respect to funding instruments and increased EU-level bureaucracy, among other things. Regarding administration at the EU-level, a long-standing criticism has been the lack of a central agency who would be in charge of the union’s strategic and operational cyber security [3, 4]. While it remains debatable whether such a centralized administrative unit is even desirable in the EU, it can be concluded that the ENISA’s increased responsibilities and mandates still do not amount to a role of a so-called “cyber tsar”. In contrast, institutional fragmentation has actually further increased with the establishment of the EU-CyCLONe network and the NIS cooperation group. Both likely increase transaction costs. If a serious and large-scale, union-wide cyber security crisis would emerge, it thus remains unclear who would take the lead, how the response would be formulated, and how effective it would be. It may be that the Commission would need to step in. While the paper’s reflection was critical already due to the focus on policy incoherency, it should be emphasized that the four policies considered likely sig- nificantly bolster the union’s cyber security posture even under the presence of potential problems. In a similar vein, it should be emphasized that the policies also offer new possibilities for European cyber security companies and profes- sionals. All clouds have silver linings. Also some other limitations should be briefly acknowledged. To some extent, the paper shared the traditional tenet in the policy coherency literature—the rationalization of policy procedures and institutional arrangements in order to improve coherency and to maximize synergies between disparate policy goals, which tend to overlook political and economic changes, trade-offs, and strug- gles [22]. A more in-depth study would be needed to address these aspects. For instance, the political aspects would offer a promising path for further research; it would be interesting to know and to better understand which member states, companies, organizations, or other stakeholders pursued and lobbied which pol- icy goals and why. An in-depth study would be also needed to better understand so-called inter-pillar coherency [17]. Once cyber crime, cyber defense, and data protection are also taken into account, it can be better understood how the EU’s grand cyber security setup works and what potential incoherencies it contains. Here, existing work on earlier EU policies [4] hints about rather similar issues discussed in this paper. As already said, furthermore, the paper was a critical reflection and not an evaluation. Although potential incoherency problems were identified, it may be that these do not amount to actual problems in the future. Therefore, a thorough policy evaluation is also needed at some point in time. References [1] Bertuzzi, L.: EU Institutions Finalise Agreement on Cybersecurity Law for Connected Products (2023), EURACTIV. Available online in May 2024: https://www.euractiv.com/section/cybersecurity/news/ eu-institutions-finalise-agreement-on-cybersecurity-law-for-connected-products/ [2] Bolognesi, T., Pflieger, G.: The Coherence(s) of Institutional Resource Regimes: Typology and Assessments from the Case of Water Supply Management. Envi- ronmental Science and Policy 99, 17–28 (2019) [3] CEPS: Strengthening the EU’s Cyber Defence Capabilities: Report of a CEPS Task Force (2018), Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS). Available on- line in May 2024: https://cdn.ceps.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/CEPS_ TFR%20on%20Cyber%20Defence_1.pdf [4] Christou, G.: Cybersecurity in the European Union: Resilience and Adaptability in Governance and Policy. Palgrave Macmillan, New York (2016) [5] Clasen, A.: Cyber Solidarity Act Moves Ahead in EU Parliament With Key Committee Vote (2023), EURACTIV. Available online in May 2024: https://www.euractiv.com/section/cybersecurity/news/ cyber-solidarity-act-moves-ahead-in-eu-parliament-with-key-committee-vote/ [6] Dub´e, L., Addy, N.A., Blouin, C., Drager, N.: From Policy Coherence to 21st Century Convergence: A Whole-of-Society Paradigm of Human and Economic Development. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1331, 201–215 (2014) [7] ECA: Cybersecurity of EU Institutions, Bodies and Agencies: Level of Prepared- ness Overall not Commensurate with the Threats (2022), European Court of Auditors (ECA). Available online in April 2024: https://www.eca.europa.eu/ Lists/ECADocuments/SR22_05/SR_cybersecurity-EU-institutions_EN.pdf [8] ECA: Opinion 02/2023 Concerning the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Laying Down Measures to Strengthen Solidarity and Capacities in the Union to Detect, Prepare for and Respond to Cybersecurity Threats and Incidents [Interinstitutional File 2023/0109(COD) of 18 april 2023] (2024), European Court of Auditors (ECA). Available online in April 2024: https: //www.eca.europa.eu/en/publications/OP-2023-02 [9] European Commission: The EU’s Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital Decade (2020), Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council, JOIN(2020) 18 final. Available online in April 2024: https://digital-strategy. ec.europa.eu/en/library/eus-cybersecurity-strategy-digital-decade-0 [10] Hurel, L.M., Lobato, L.C.: Cyber Security Governance in Brazil: Keeping Silos or Building Bridges? In: Romaniuk, S.N., Manjikian, M. (eds.) Routledge Companion to Global Cyber-Security Strategy, pp. 504–518. Routledge, Abingdon [11] Leeuw, F.L., Leeuw, B.: Cyber Society and Digital Policies: Challenges to Evalu- ation? Evaluation 18(1), 111–127 (2012) [12] Mahoney, J.: Path Dependence in Historical Sociology. Theory and Society 29, 507–548 (2000) [13] Mikac, R.: Protection of the EU’s Critical Infrastructures: Results and Challenges. Applied Cybersecurity & Internet Governance 2(1), 1–25 (2023) [14] M¨unch, S.: Beyond National Policymaking: Conceptions of Myth in Interpretive Policy Analysis and Their Value for IR. In: de Guevara, B.B. (ed.) Myth and Narrative in International Politics, pp. 47–66. Palgrave Macmillan, London (2016) [15] Perennes, P.: Need for Coherence Between Institutions and Technologies: The Example of Uncertain Train Paths in France. Competition and Regulation in Network Industries 14(2), 130–150 (2013) [16] Picciotto, R.: The Evaluation of Policy Coherence for Development. Evalution 11(3), 311–330 (2005) [17] Portela, C., Raube, K.: The EU Polity and Foreign Policy Coherence. Journal of Contemporary European Research 8(1), 3–20 (2012) [18] Ruohonen, J.: An Acid Test for Europeanization: Public Cyber Security Pro- curement in the European Union. European Journal for Security Research 5(2), 349–377 (2020) [19] Ruohonen, J.: A Review of Product Safety Regulations in the European Union. International Cybersecurity Law Review 3, 345–366 (2022) [20] Ruohonen, J., Hyrynsalmi, S., Lepp¨anen, V.: An Outlook on the Institutional Evolution of the European Union Cyber Security Apparatus. Government Infor- mation Quarterly 33(4), 746–756 (2016) [21] Yanow, D.: Conducting Interpretive Policy Analysis. Sage, Thousand Oaks (2000) [22] Yunita, A., Biermann, F., Kim, R.E., Vijge, M.J.: The (Anti-)Politics of Pol- icy Coherence for Sustainable Development in the Netherlands: Logic, Method, Effects. Geoforum 128, 92–102 (2022)